The Mekong River has supported people and wildlife for millennia. Through the four stories below, gain insight into the lives of people who depend on the river for their way of life, the wildlife that rely on its waters, and the ways WWF is helping protect its future. Along with millions of people, the Mekong River waters support thousands of species of flora and fauna in one of the most biodiverse regions on the Earth. A fishing family shares the value of natural water flows, lively fishing grounds, abundant bird populations—and the power of keeping a close connection to home. It sustains us; it provides drinking water and sanitation; it powers homes, businesses, transportation and economies. In remote northern Cambodia, a community thrives on fish and dolphin tourism— but a proposed dam may destroy it all. The Mekong River flows more than 2,700 miles from Tibet to the South China Sea. Along with sustaining millions of people, its waters support thousands of species of flora and fauna in one of the most biodiverse regions on the Earth. Here are just a few. Standing up to 6 feet high at the shoulder and weighing more than 2,500 pounds, the endangered wild water buffalo is bulkier than its domestic relatives. Its horns grow up to 6 feet across. Water buffalo once roamed much of Asia and remained relatively common in eastern Cambodia’s open forests as late as the 1950s, but wetlands loss, hunting and degradation of floodplains has reduced them to about 4,000 widely scattered individuals— probably fewer. One of the few remaining populations survives in Cambodia’s dry forests. The critically endangered, relatively small Siamese crocodile—adults are usually under 10 feet long—once occurred across most of Southeast Asia, but its numbers are now greatly reduced. In the 1990s, scientists thought the species extinct (or nearly so) in the wild, but in recent years it has turned up in Thailand and in Vietnam, home probably to fewer than 100 animals. Isolated populations of unknown size survive in Myanmar, Indonesia, Laos and Cambodia. Named for its fur, which is shorter and sleeker than that of other otters, the smooth-coated otter can be found all across Asia. But its numbers are declining. In parts of Southeast Asia, human pressures have destroyed much of its habitat, creating a major challenge to the aquatic weasel’s survival. Otter numbers are also being reduced by illegal poaching for furs. This lanky, tree-dwelling ape is one of six species of crested gibbon. All have declined throughout their ranges, mostly due to increases in exploitation such as bushmeat hunting. Yellow-cheeked crested gibbons occur in northeastern Cambodia and southern Vietnam and Laos; some 2,500 survive in Cambodia’s Eastern Plains Landscape. Swinging by their arms, they travel through the canopies of tropical forests, and they usually start their days with bouts of calls that serve as vocal claims to territory and trees. The Irrawaddy dolphin lives in both coastal and brackish river waters at various sites across Asia; some traditional fishermen have taught wild Irrawaddy dolphins to herd fish toward their nets in return for a portion of the catch. Freshwater populations are often isolated by changing river conditions and drowned in fishing nets. Five of the world’s river dolphin populations are endangered; in the lower Mekong, fewer than 100 Irrawaddy dolphins survive. The giant ibis is the largest ibis species in the world: standing about 40 inches tall, it is more than twice the height of the glossy ibis found in the United States. Fairly common in the Mekong Delta as late as the 1920s, this critically endangered species—the national bird of Cambodia—has been reduced by deforestation, drained wetlands and warfare. Remnant populations totaling a few hundred birds can be found in Cambodia, with a stronghold in the Eastern Plains Landscape. One of the world’s largest freshwater fish, the endangered giant freshwater stingray grows up to 16 feet long and may weigh as much as 1,300 pounds. A bottom dweller, it cruises the depths of the Mekong and other rivers as it hunts for small fish and invertebrates. Population declines throughout its range have resulted from loss of habitat to dam projects, degradation of water quality due to deforestation, and fishing for meat, sport and the aquarium trade. At almost 6 feet, the Sarus crane is the world’s tallest flying bird. It once roamed wetlands and open forests across Asia, but its distribution is now fragmented by habitat loss. The world population, ranging from India to Australia, probably numbers no more than 20,000 birds. About 1,000 of the birds still survive in Vietnam and Cambodia. Vietnam created Tram Chim National Park in part to protect the Sarus crane. Rare throughout its range across southern and Southeast Asia, this endangered cat favors wetlands and streams. Twice the size of a house cat, it is an adept swimmer, even under water, and preys mainly on fish, along with crustaceans and other aquatic species. The cat’s world population, which ranges from India to Thailand, is likely half what it was 25 years ago, though solid population data is lacking. Poaching and loss of habitat to aquaculture and other types of development are persistent threats. Growing to about 15 feet tall, the pygmy date palm lives at the waterline along Southeast Asian streams and can grow in dense stands on rocky banks. It is well adapted to life along rivers that periodically overrun their banks. Floods often rip away other plants, but the roots of this palm cling to rock firmly enough to avoid being torn free. The palm also can stand being completely submerged during wet seasons. However, it cannot withstand the many development projects along the river, including road projects that bury strands of the trees in refuse soil. Biologists discovered Helen’s flying frog in 2009 about 60 miles from Ho Chi Minh City. A denizen of the forest canopy, this 4-inch-long amphibian is large for a flying frog. When extended, thin membranes between the toes of all four feet unfurl into sails, allowing the frog to glide from tree to tree or to the ground. Burgeoning human populations and the cutting of the frog’s lowland forest habitat jeopardize its survival. The smallest and one of the rarest bear species, the sun bear forages in trees for fruit, small rodents, birds, insects and honey. Formerly widespread in Southeast Asian lowland forests, the species has disappeared from most of its range in recent decades. Like other Asian bears, it is imperiled by use in traditional medicine as well as by deforestation. In Cambodia, WWF camera traps have documented the sun bear's presence in the Eastern Plains Landscape, which is also home to Sarus cranes, Siamese crocodiles and giant ibis. Growing to more than 9 feet long and weighing in excess of 700 pounds, the critically endangered Mekong giant catfish is one of the world’s largest freshwater fish. Adults are toothless and feed primarily on algae. The species’ range once covered nearly the entire length of the Mekong River (the only place in the world where it occurs) but is now confined to the Lower Mekong. Biologists estimate that the population has dropped about 90% in the past decade, due primarily to overfishing and habitat loss. This endangered turtle spends much of its life buried on river bottoms, motionless, waiting to snap up passing crustaceans, mollusks and fish. It can grow up to 6 feet long. Though its range extends from eastern and southern India to Vietnam, Indonesia, China and the Philippines, the Cantor’s giant softshell has disappeared from much of its habitat. Locally abundant numbers occur along parts of the Mekong River. In a national park at the heart of what was once called the Plain of Reeds, a fishing family shares the value of natural water flows, lively fishing grounds, abundant bird populations—and the power of keeping a close connection to home. With the sort of easy precision that comes only with time, Pham Huu Tri drives his hand into the calm water and pulls out a square, fine-meshed cage. Inside, a handful of fish, each hardly the size of a finger, flop about, smacking and bouncing off the sides of their enclosure. It is just past 6 a.m., and the day's first sunbeams imbue the Mekong Delta with a warm, yellowish glow. Tri's father-in-law and fishing companion, Tran Van Cu, lifts the hatch atop their long, flat boat and Tri pours the fish into a built-in, watery compartment as they rest atop the rippling surface. The seagrass and amaranth that flourish here jiggle. Red-winged dragonflies swirl around the boat. It's a decent catch, and a good sign for the day to come. With a 10-foot-long bamboo stick, Tri glides the boat toward the next trap, hidden somewhere inside the wetland treasure known as Tram Chim National Park. Tri is 38. He has never left southern Vietnam and says that people have always fished in the park’s pristine wetlands, even before some gained the legal right to do so. It’s not until recently, however, that inhabitants like Tri came to understand the fragile balance between the park and the Mekong River, the reasons for the abundance of fish, plant and bird species. Now, he works with park authorities and is eager to teach others what he’s learned. For Tri and Cu, Tram Chim is the source of most of their food, the basis of their families’ livelihoods, and the center of their lives. Strictly speaking, Tri and Cu could fish elsewhere. It would only take the well-attuned father- and son-in-law a few minutes to walk to the streams of the delta, where fish are plentiful. But in the wet season, torrential rains turn the Mekong into a ferocious river. For small fishing boats like Tri and Cu’s, it’s too difficult to navigate. Besides, Tri explains, the abundance of fish inside the park, untapped and just the cast of a hook away, is too tempting. Cu says that back when it was illegal he, like most other fishermen in the area, used to sneak past the guards and rangers to fish there. “Up the Mekong” is a broad description. The river starts its journey in the Himalayas and meanders through Tibet, China, Myanmar, Laos, Thailand and Cambodia before it empties into the South China Sea, east of Vietnam. It’s the world’s second-most- biodiverse river, after the Amazon. Of its 1,300 known fish species, 600 are migrants that require different habitats during their life cycles and can travel long distances to lay their eggs. “Why do fish take the pain of migrating upstream over such long distances?” asks Dr. Eric Baran, senior scientist at the WorldFish Center, an international research organization. “Well, a big river like the Mekong carries a lot and flushes everything downwards, including fish eggs and juveniles. Parent fishes swim far upstream so that their offspring have time to grow during the drift with the current, and reach the rich downstream floodplains to feed and grow there. Without that long-distance effort, the juveniles would get flushed straight into the sea.” Downstream ecosystems like Tram Chim offer rich and productive habitats for fish to grow up in before they return to the faster-flowing Mekong and the long slog back upstream. The majority of these fish make it to spawning grounds; millions, however, end up on the breakfast, lunch and dinner tables of the nearly 180 million people in Laos, Cambodia, Thailand and Vietnam. In spite of all that, Tri insists his community is excited about the future. WWF is supporting a burgeoning tourism business in the park, he says—an expansion of opportunities for local people to show visitors from Ho Chi Minh City and beyond the landscapes and lives of the people who live here. While fishing earns Tri enough to meet the basic needs of his family, he, like many breadwinners, hopes to offer them a better life. For him, that would mean things as simple as providing a concrete house that doesn’t shake when strong winds blow over the delta, and enabling his sons to go to university. They study hard, he says, and are too smart to become fishermen like their father and grandfather. He says that showing tourists how to fish might bring his family much-needed income, but at the same time he is thankful for what he has. “I wish there was more tourism development for the park,” says Tri. “But now, I just do everything the best I can for the future of my family.” For the park rangers, waking up to a concert of trilling, tweeting and chirping is the best part of their job. They sleep on the edges of the park, typically in huts on stilts, and birdcalls signal the beginning of their workday on the winding waterways. This interdependence means that efforts to secure one aspect can easily destabilize others. For example, attempts to boost agricultural productivity may lead to increased demands for water and energy inputs, which could impact biodiversity and ecosystem services. Similarly, the need for power generation could pull much-needed water out of the ecosystems that depend on fresh water for everything from drinking water to healthy fish stocks. Finding the right balance is the key. Sources: WWF’s Living Planet Report 2014, except as noted. “Over there!” Lang, the operator of a small tour boat, points his wiry arm. Several hundred feet away, a gray bump breaks through the surface of the water, forming a rounded bow before slowly sinking back into the murky waters. An Irrawaddy dolphin. Shortly after, another pops up. Then another. The Anlung Cheutal “dolphin pool” is in a stretch of the Mekong River in northernmost Cambodia. It is one of the best places to see the Irrawaddy dolphin, one of only seven river dolphin species in the world, in its natural habitat. The dolphin pool, nestled between the borders of Cambodia and Laos, is a raw, earthly paradise of waterfalls that stretches for miles, passing sandy islands and flooded forests of braided tree trunks bent into the current like giants trying to defeat the river’s flow. Thousands of tourists flock here each year, providing a vital income for the pristine but poverty-stricken region. First and foremost, Lang explains, they come for the dolphins. “Dolphins are like humans,” he says, his eyes still fixed on the mammals. “Sometimes they swim around alone, but they like to meet, and then they chit-chat and show their happiness.” Just seeing the dolphins makes Lang happy, he says, but he also knows that the species is close to extinction: only around 85 individuals remain in this stretch of the river. This is why Lang is a river guard as well as a tour operator. People-driven impacts such as noise pollution from shipping, mercury pollution from gold mining, and sedimentation are accelerating changes in the dolphins’ environment and cutting into the number of fish. In recent decades, dolphin numbers have plummeted. But most responsible for the decline, experts say, are curtain-like gillnets cast by local fishermen. Dolphin senses can perceive the fish that have become entangled, but not the nets themselves. What looks like easy, abundant prey quickly becomes their demise: once the dolphins are entangled in the nets, they drown. View all issues h