Each year when the monsoon season in Cambodia nears its end in October or November, stretches of the mighty Mekong River teem with colorful dragon boats slicing the water’s surface. The riverbanks are packed with onlookers who’ve traveled from all over the country to Phnom Penh to watch the spectacle of boat racing and join in the revelry that marks the Bon Om Touk water festival—the most important holiday in this Southeast Asian country. For three consecutive days, the nation of 16 million celebrates the seasonal ebb of the Mekong and the abundant fish run that ensues. Fish provide an estimated 76% of the animal protein in Cambodian diets, and much of the supply comes from the Mekong. Accounting for 25% of the global freshwater fish catch, the river is the most productive inland fishery on the planet, worth an estimated $1.7 billion annually. At around 3,000 miles, the Mekong is among the longest rivers in Asia. The lower Mekong mainstem is also one of the last long stretches of tropical river in the world that is largely unaffected by human-made obstructions such as dams and levees that alter a river’s flow, hem it in, or block fish migrations. Starting on the Tibetan Plateau, the upper Mekong flows through the rugged, sparsely populated terrain of China’s mountains and deep canyons, where it is known as the Lancang River. In the lower Mekong basin of Myanmar, Laos, Thailand, Cambodia, and Viet Nam, the river meanders through a gentler, more populous landscape before emptying into the South China Sea. For the tens of millions of people in the Greater Mekong region, the river is not only at the center of cultural practices and food security but also important for mitigating the impacts of climate change. It’s used for transport and as a source of drinking water, provides irrigation for agriculture, and generates income. Home to 1,200 species, it is also the second-most biodiverse river in the world, after the Amazon. Perhaps nowhere is its life-sustaining power more apparent than in the nearly 120-mile stretch running from the Laotian border south to the sleepy Cambodian river town of Kratie. This free-flowing reach experiences the largest annual fish migration on Earth, as fish move from the vast Tonlé Sap Lake in western Cambodia to spawning grounds in the north. Brimming with biodiversity, the river and its basin provide habitat to the endangered Irrawaddy dolphin and the critically endangered white-shouldered ibis, giant ibis, red-headed vulture, and white-rumped vulture. Some species harbored here have all but disappeared from other parts of Southeast Asia. WWF has been tackling threats to wildlife and people in this part of Cambodia—known as the Mekong Flooded Forest—since 2002. But today the wild stretches of the lower Mekong—and the intricate ecosystem as a whole—are under pressure. The region is changing fast, and with unprecedented social and economic development have come hydropower dams, sand mining, overfishing, pollution, and more. The threats to wildlife and people on the Mekong are many and interrelated, says Marc Goichot, WWF’s freshwater lead for Asia Pacific. But make no mistake, he says, “the biggest threat is posed by hydropower.” In recent decades, the Mekong has become increasingly fragmented as countries seek to harness its potential to generate electricity. Eleven dams already constrain the mainstem in China, and Laos and Cambodia have been tapping into the power of the Mekong and its tributaries to anticipate the energy demands of the growing economies of the lower basin. Today more than 200 large dams are planned, completed, or under construction in the lower Mekong. Good news came in March 2020 and sent jubilant shock waves across the basin: The Cambodian government paused the Sambor and Stung Treng projects and imposed a 10-year moratorium on new dam construction on the Mekong mainstem. “Meaningful dialogue with key players, including relevant government agencies, and provision of solutions and alternative options were the keys to the success of this campaign,” says Teak Seng, WWF-Cambodia country director. “It’s a historic victory.” “This was a huge win,” says Goichot, “especially for the Irrawaddy dolphin. The main threat has been removed.” In addition to the dam rulings, the government announced that the Ministry of Mines and Energy plans to nearly quadruple solar energy capacity from 90 megawatts (MW) to 320 MW by 2022 and is developing an 80 MW wind power plant in southern Cambodia and a 100 MW plant in Mondulkiri Province. All that energy could provide power—at current usage levels—for close to 1.4 million Cambodians. Even though additional sustainable energy will be needed to keep up with the country’s desire to grow their economy, the government’s change of course “put Cambodia on the world map,” says Seng. “We have set an example for other countries. Everything is possible, so we all should be optimistic and have hope.” Despite the wins in Cambodia, Goichot says the Mekong remains “in a state of stress that is pretty alarming.” WWF has been working on a plethora of solutions to address the threats facing the river. To stamp out illegal fishing in the Mekong Flooded Forest, for example, WWF has been supporting community fisheries and river patrols and helping villagers develop alternative revenue streams. We have also been working with authorities in Viet Nam to counter the impacts of sand mining—another major threat to the Mekong Delta. Working with companies on water stewardship and building with nature— understanding key natural processes and building with them, not against them—are equally important, says Goichot. But perhaps most important, he says, we need to keep reminding people of the river’s significance. “We need to keep up the awareness of the value of the river, climate-disaster prevention, the cultures, the communities, the natural wonders, and the economy,” Goichot notes. Awareness, he says, is a vital first step in the multistream effort it will take to protect a thriving Mekong for the long haul. Learn more about the Greater Mekong. Learn more about the Greater Mekong. WWF works with communities, governments, and businesses on the lower Mekong to promote water stewardship and ensure that humans and the river ecosystem prosper. Keeping rivers free flowing is one of the most cost-effective climate change adaptation strategies we have. The Irrawaddy and the Salween, two of the last large free-flowing tropical rivers in Asia, flow through the spectacularly biodiverse landscapes of Myanmar. WWF recently completed a detailed analysis of updated country data to map the connectivity of these rivers and is supporting development of a national alternative-energy vision. Laos contains some of the largest natural forests remaining in Asia, so WWF is promoting the sustainable use of forest resources in this landlocked country. Highlighting the significant value of a free-flowing Mekong, WWF promotes alternatives to dams, which can provide energy and other socioeconomic services while minimizing impacts on nature and people. Thailand’s vital rivers and wetlands are under pressure from infrastructure and agricultural growth in a booming economy. WWF is advocating for policies that improve the governance of freshwater resources here. As a result, water stewardship, sustainable infrastructure development, and green energy production have begun to move from concept to reality. In the stretch of the Mekong mainstem between the town of Kratie and the Laotian border, WWF works with local communities and Cambodia’s Fisheries Administration to protect the Irrawaddy river dolphin. Here, numbers of the critically endangered mammal grew from just 80 in 2015 to 100 in 2019—the first recorded increase in the population in over 20 years—and have stabilized, according to a 2020 report. Viet Nam is among the top five garment exporters in the world, and textile manufacturing is a thirsty business. WWF is engaging with key players in the industry—from local factories to global apparel brands—to more actively manage water resources, address the sinking of the Mekong Delta, improve water quality, limit industrial pollution of the river, and avert climate disaster. View all issues h