This piece was originally published by WWF-Nepal. It is 6:30 am and Bishnu is the first to rise from the team. “There is nothing like the morning scent of the jungle and the fresh aroma of coffee to start your day with,” he says. By 7:30 am, the rest of the team are by the fire and help themselves to some coffee and biscuits. This is followed by an early lunch of rice, lentils, and vegetables prepared by the team members, each taking their turn at their make-shift kitchen. The team will be having their next meal only once they are back at camp from the day’s work. Back at the camp, Bishnu and his team plan out the day’s tasks and check and pack all the required equipment and gear. A map that outlines the area the team is required to cover is spread out for them to review. It has been divided into five segments, about 1.5 square miles each. Bishnu’s team decides that the first spot they would hit would be Nakkali Khola. Next comes the equipment. The team has with them ten pairs of cameras equipped with motion/infrared sensors and GPS for camera traps to detect and monitor wildlife. They choose the pair they would be installing that day and do an initial check of batteries and settings. The cameras are then packed together with a compass, GPS set, digital camera, range finders, measuring tape, and datasheets. The team is ready to head out. After a one-hour hike through the forests, Bishnu and his team arrive at Nakkali Khola, their site for the camera trap installation. The site is located near a stream that feeds into the adjoining Rapti River. Bishnu’s team has spotted tiger tracks along this trail and feel that it is a perfect site to set up the camera trap; they are sure that tigers would use this trail to get to the river for drinking Bishnu and Harka take charge of one of the cameras while Prakhyat and Bir handle the other. Each camera is mounted on a wooden pole at a height of 16 inches from the ground and placed about 26 feet apart. Sabita marks each camera and memory card with an identifying number - 19A and 19B for this pair. Bishnu then does the interesting ‘tiger walk’ with both hands and feet on the ground in order to test the placement of the cameras; the image taken by the camera shows that the placement is perfect. Bishnu explains that once a tiger is photographically captured by the cameras, the individual animal is identified with the help of its stripe pattern that is unique to each tiger. The data obtained on image capture and subsequent recaptures is analyzed to estimate tiger populations. With the cameras installed, the next task at hand for the team is to conduct the habitat occupancy and line transect surveys. The cameras will be left in each grid in the forest for the next 15-20 days. Together with photographing tigers, Bishnu’s team also needs to record other signs of tiger and prey activity in the area in order to map the distribution of these animals and understand the range occupied by both tigers and the species they prey on. With the camera trap installation completed, the team next walks a distance of just over one mile along the Narayani river bed to conduct the occupancy survey. They are thrilled to come across a continuous track of tiger footprints, also known as “pugmarks”. The team takes note of the details of the pugmarks and photographs them for future analysis.