Tigers are amazing animals and measurable drivers of biodiversity in their habitats. From cultural icons to valuable indicators of their ecosystems, they are as familiar as they are alluring. Sadly, with habitat destruction, poaching, and conflict with humans, the odds seem stacked against them. But leaders from countries where tigers roam and their partners, including the Tiger Conservation Coalition, have been working to help tigers. Together, we’ve been building experience while collecting data and case studies about what it takes to stabilize and recover tiger populations. After decades of conservation efforts, global wild tiger numbers have been increasing, but the progress is fragile, and we can’t afford to lose momentum. What’s the next urgent step for them? We must pounce on sustainable financing so that we can continue our conservation progress. We must pounce on sustainable financing so that we can continue our conservation progress. What is sustainable financing and how will it help tigers? Sustainable financing for conservation areas means investment decisions are made with environmental and social impacts in mind, and the awareness that successful conservation initiatives take time and investment. For tiger habitats, this comprises adequate, long-term investments in tiger conservation by public and private sectors that support clearly defined tiger conservation goals. It ensures that tiger landscapes are climate-resilient and that there are environmental, social and economic benefits for the region and its communities. Recovering tiger numbers and restoring their ecosystems involves collaboration between countries where tigers live, donors (both private and public) outside of tiger range countries, international agencies, and non-governmental organizations. Sustainable financing for tiger landscapes will develop and replicate successful conservation finance models such as Bhutan for Life. At the same time, it must inspire large-scale investments for sustainable economic recovery in these areas. And all this must be implemented with the participation of Indigenous People and local communities. It’s Time to Pounce on Sustainable Financing Why Tiger Landscapes are So Important United in Tiger Conservation Working together is the only way to sustain current progress and see future success for tiger conservation. The Tiger Conservation Coalition is an independent group of organizations that brings together leading biologists and experts in wildlife crime, human-wildlife coexistence, policy, finance, development and communications, with unprecedented alignment on achieving tiger conservation at scale. Its member organizations include WWF, the Environmental Investigation Agency (EIA); International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN); Fauna & Flora International (FFI); Natural State; Panthera; TRAFFIC; United Nations Development Programme (UNDP); Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS); and the Zoological Society of London (ZSL). Even though tigers are iconic species that attract significant capital, tiger range countries have limited investment from the domestic private sector and individual donors in recovering and securing populations. Considering the increasing wealth across the globe, we want to seek investments from public and private partnerships, while also testing innovative and sustainable financial instruments, that could significantly boost financing for and engagement in tiger conservation. By investing in tiger conservation at the landscape, regional, and national scales, we can address the multitude of environmental and developmental issues that Asia is facing and ensure a sustainable future for tigers and the people who live in tiger landscapes.