WWF president and CEO Carter Roberts talks with WIZIPAN LITTLE ELK, CEO of the Rosebud Economic Development Corporation (REDCO), about reintroducing bison to native land and how to be an ally. WIZIPAN LITTLE ELK This interview has been edited for length and clarity. CR Last October, 100 bison were released into the Rosebud Sioux’s territory. I’d love for you to talk about that moment, and what it meant to you, the leaders of your community, and the leaders of REDCO. WLE Absolutely. It was spectacular. The Lakota word for buffalo is tatanka. It’s a combination of two words—tanka, which means large or magnificent, and ta, which makes it possessive. Literally, it means “their greatness.” Buffalo and humans, or buffalo and Lakota, are the same. We come from the same common ancestor. Buffalo have so much to show us and so much to teach us. CR A few years ago, I was cleaning out a box and rediscovered something I’d lost many years earlier. It was a list I’d made when I was 28 years old, and it detailed those things I’d hoped to accomplish in my life. And when I found it I mostly felt gratitude, to have been given so many opportunities to realize so many of my dreams. When I told this story to a mentor, his response was simple: “You know what this means, right? It means you now have to make a new list!” Can you talk about your life goals, and the progress you’ve made against them? WLE When I was 19, I said, “I want to do four things with my life,” and I wrote them down. I wanted to do something significant with education, buffalo, housing, and renewable energy. This past year was incredibly profound for me because we started the Wolakota regenerative buffalo range project, which is going to become the world’s largest Native American-owned and -managed herd. We also opened a Lakota language immersion school here. And we have some great ideas about housing and renewable energy. But I want to get to where you’re at, where I can look back and say, “It’s time to make a new list.” CR Well, making progress on such things is often accompanied by no small amount of pain and effort. I’ve managed to acquire quite a few scars along the way, and I’ve also somehow managed to lose almost all of my hair ... so be careful what you wish for! Starting something is magnificent, but carrying through on those commitments is everything. How do you make sure this important work succeeds? WLE I always tell people, I’m not that good at anything—I’m just really stubborn, and I don’t quit. My job is to empower the people who are good at things to fulfill their purpose. For example, the head of the school we started was born to be an educator. And I can help him realize that vision. All of these buffalo we’re raising have a purpose, too—to heal the land, to create more buffalo, and to sacrifice when necessary. I can help provide a space for them to live their authentic lives as buffalo. The word Lakota means “to be an ally.” For us to be our full and authentic selves as Lakota, we need to be able to work CR What’s your advice for allies? View all issues h