In the upper reaches of the Tian Shan Mountains of Kyrgyzstan, beyond fertile valleys dotted with apricot trees and ancient Silk Road settlements, the arid climate isn't particularly friendly. "Tian" means celestial in Chinese, and the jagged peaks here are among the closest on Earth to the heavens: Jengish Chokusu, on the country's rugged, southeastern border with China, rises above 24,000 feet. The cold, thin air and treeless steppe seems more fit for snow leopards and Siberian ibex than for people, who for centuries have subsisted here by herding their horses and sheep across barren slopes in search of pasture. Even before the weather changed, it was never an easy place to live. Nestled at 10,500 feet beneath the mountainous Chinese border, Ak-Shyrak was first established as a geological survey station for Soviet mining interests. The settlement sits in a treeless, high mountain desert whose lakes and tributaries make up the headwaters of one of Central Asia's great rivers, the Syr Darya, which flows west through Uzbekistan and southern Kazakhstan into the remnants of the Aral Sea. The extreme conditions and rocky, sparsely vegetated slopes at these elevations are ideal habitat for the snow leopard and its prey, which include the spiral-horned argali (also known as the Marco Polo sheep), Siberian ibex, and gray marmot. When the first settlers arrived in the area, the hills were full of argali. Omurbeck Kurmanaliev recalls his grandparents admonishing him not to kill female mountain sheep. "They gave us their homeland," the elders would say. But attitudes changed after 1991, when the Soviet Union collapsed and Kyrgyzstan gained its independence. Once Soviet mining operations ceased, hundreds of residents abandoned Ak-Shyrak. Those who remained began breeding cattle. Some, out of desperation, turned to poaching. "The income from argali and ibex meat and the skins of marmots and martens allowed us to stockpile food for the winter," Kurmanaliev says. When WWF began working there in 2009, almost 80% of Ak-Shyrak's population was hunting wildlife. "Poverty was so high," recalls Farida Balbakova, WWF's project coordinator in Kyrgyzstan. "It was difficult to convince them not to poach, so we tried to offer them alternative sources of income." Balbakova remembers spending many sleepless nights contemplating the deforestation, disappearance of animals, and degradation of pastures that she witnessed across the country's various elevations and habitats. "I felt as if the land was asking," she says, "'Please save me.'" She was up against the all-too-often ingrained human tendency to regard nature and wildlife as things—almost exclusively—to be consumed. "I realized," she recalls, "it was first necessary for the villagers to see that the Earth was theirs to protect—that it belongs to them." For his part in the festival, Omurbeck Kurmanaliev acted in a scene in which he played a bumbling poacher who gets his foot caught in the claws of an animal trap. A former poacher himself, he is now one of 10 local villagers who work as park rangers at the Sarychat-Ertash State Nature Reserve, an isolated valley over the mountain from Ak-Shyrak that contains Kyrgyzstan's highest density of snow leopards. Since the Kyrgyz government established the park in 1995, park territory has been doubled to nearly 370,000 acres (149,733 hectares), thanks in no small part to the efforts of Balbakova and other conservationists, who lobbied the president and worked to block mining exploration in the park. The reserve is home to five rare and endangered mammal species—snow leopard, Tian Shan brown bear, argali sheep, Siberian ibex, and Pallas's cat—a number of rare plants, and nine rare or endangered bird species, including the saker falcon, golden eagle, Himalayan griffon, Eurasian eagle owl, and ibisbill. WWF has provided technical support to the rangers, as well as uniforms, wildlife camera traps, and wind turbines that power two ranger stations. When the park was formed 20 years ago, the argali sheep population had dwindled to just 50 individuals—even the rangers were poaching them. Today, they number about 2,500. Ibex in the area have also rebounded. The last known poaching of a protected animal at the reserve occurred in 2008. In the past two years, high-level government delegations from all 12 snow leopard range countries have met in the Kyrgyz capital, Bishkek, and pledged to work together to ensure survival of the endangered cat. Those officials designated 2015 as the International Year of the Snow Leopard. Now, conservation groups like the Snow Leopard Trust and WWF are contributing scientific research and community education, helping local women earn extra income through handicrafts and snow leopard tourism programs, and advising villagers on methods for protecting livestock. And Kyrgyz government agencies and nonprofits have started working together with INTERPOL on a national antipoaching program that trains, publicly honors, and financially rewards park rangers and community members who successfully apprehend wildlife poachers. According to a world bank report, Kyrgyzstan ranks third among countries in Europe and Central Asia that are most vulnerable to climate change. Global warming is expected to increase average annual temperatures throughout Central Asia, and bring about fewer frost days and longer-lasting heat waves. Severe droughts aren't expected to plague the region, as they are in parts of Africa and the Mediterranean, but Central Asia's mountains are expected to get drier as precipitation levels fall and glaciers, which feed the region's rivers, continue to melt. These changes have consequences not only for agriculture and drinking water supplies, but for downstream hydroelectric power generation as well. As temperatures rise and glaciers melt across Asia, forests will ascend to higher elevations in alpine regions, posing significant challenges for snow leopards and herders: Higher tree lines will put them in greater competition with each other for dwindling alpine grassland resources. The Bishkek Declaration, signed by the 12 snow leopard range countries in 2013, acknowledges that "mountain ecosystems inhabited by snow leopards provide essential ecosystem services, including storing and releasing water from the origins of river systems that benefit one-third of the world's human population." Learn more about Asia High Mountains. Learn more about Asia High Mountains. View all issues h