To reach the indigenous village of Puerto Luz in the Amazon rain forest of southern Peru, the first step is to get to the city of Puerto Maldonado, capital of the province of Madre de Dios. The next step is a three-hour drive on the Interoceanic Highway to the banks of the latte-colored Tambopata River. Peru holds the 10th-most-forested area of any country in the world; over half the country—some 260,000 square miles—is covered in trees. Only Brazil holds a larger area of Amazonian tropical forest. This helps make Peru one of the 10 most biodiverse countries in the world, with over 330,000 people who depend directly on the country's forests for their livelihoods, and countless more who depend on the numerous product and ecosystem services those forests provide. At ground level, indigenous communities throughout the Madre de Dios region and the rest of the Amazon are taking a customized approach to a global initiative called "Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation," or REDD+. The "+" expands the program's scope to include conservation and sustainable management of forests, as well as an increase in the forests' carbon storage capacity. Fermín Chimatani Tayori, the Puerto Luz resident who is leading his community's REDD+ effort and serves as president of the Amarakaeri reserve, sits on a porch as the rain points on the corrugated metal roofs of the village. Residents of the village were concerned about some elements of the standard REDD+ approach, he says, even as they agreed with its overall goal. So, in a joint effort with indigenous groups throughout the Amazon, they designed and proposed a new twist on it called Amazon Indigenous REDD+. Jorge Tayori Kendero, vice president of the Puerto Luz community, wears a traditional headdress for his meeting with WWF. All REDD+ programs require the monitoring and measuring of carbon emissions from changes in the forest, in part so that progress can be compensated financially, but also to learn what conservation strategies are most effective. Indigenous communities in the Amazon take this one step further, as they also want to monitor and measure what is most important to them—things like changes in biodiversity and the spiritual elements of nature. Their approach to doing so is spelled out in a "life plan," which provides conservation planning (as is required by REDD+) and more, such as how to manage tourism and the logging undertaken for subsistence reasons. Their REDD+ activities also place particular emphasis on securing land rights and tenure. It's a necessary addition: land rights, or the lack thereof, is a pervasive issue in the Peruvian Amazon, where the management and ownership of large swaths of territory are unclear at best. In Peru, indigenous communities have the legal right to manage approximately 27 million acres, which represents almost 16% of the country's forested land. But they are managing another 24 million acres of forest land, too, even though it is technically unclear is they have the right to do so. They have formally asked the Peruvian government for legal authority to manage that land and are awaiting a response. Most forest land in Peru is owned by the national government, which grants permission—often in the form of concessions—to applicants for temporary harvest of certain tracts of land. But indigenous communities, like the one where Tayori lives, want the land to be recognized as their own, permanently, in acknowledgment of their long-term use and stewardship. "It's our own proposal to show that we indigenous people are preserving the land," Tayori says as the downpour grows stronger. "Its' not just carbon-related. It included preserving clean water, wildlife, everything that lives in the forest. It also makes it clear to the world that we, this community, own this land." He explains that his village and other indigenous communities are motivated to do everything they can to keep their trees standing and their forests thriving. The World Bank's Forest Investment Program has dedicated US $50 million to Peru's indigenous communities, and the funding they receive for reducing carbon emissions is used to create and implement those life plans. WWF, a longtime advocate for indigenous rights, is responsible for administering these grants. At a lumber mill near Puerto Maldonado, saws the size of kiddie pools fill the air with sawdust and the sour tang of fresh-cut wood. Clawed tractors stack tree trucks cut from the surrounding forests into huge piles. The mill is owned by the Maderacre Group, which manages nearly 850 square miles of tropical forest, the largest such concession in Peru. Last year, these blades chewed through 40,000 cubic meters of wood from six species of trees. Counterintuitively, this is a good thing. Maderacre's focus is the responsible use of forest resources, says industrial manager Andrea del Pozo, and the company was the first in Peru to participate in a REDD+ project. In the office in Lima, far from the forests and mills of Madre de Dios, Gustavo Suárez de Freitas directs the forest conservation and climate change programs of Peru's Ministry of the Environment. He points to a graph on the wall showing acres of trees cut in Peru per year. "The fact is that deforestation is increasing," he says. And indeed, the columns representing deforestation rates rise steadily from left to right. "Right now we have a lot of regulations that are totally impossible to fulfill." Part of the reason is that the ministry itself was only created in 2009. Another is the high rate of turnover in government positions at all levels—local, regional and national. Like Tayori, Suárez de Freitas says that the lack of land tenure also is a major stumbling block. "In parts of the country we have areas with no authority and no ownership. And if land is [effectively] free, small-scale agriculture operations pop up almost overnight." Back east, just outside Puerto Maldonado, recent downpours have left the Tambopata River swollen and surging in the sunshine. Entire trees sweep past the riverbank where Victor Zambrano Gonzáles describes how he created K'erenda Homet, a 40-acre private nature reserve on the outskirts of the city. View all issues h