The fifth anniversary of the five-day siege was marked this spring and begs the question my son asked at the end of the movie—why did villagers turn to piracy in the first place? The inescapable conclusion: they had no fish and their families were starving.

Go to many coastal areas of Africa. You’ll find fish stocks plundered by trawlers from places like Spain and China. The coastline of Somalia—the longest in all of mainland Africa—remains especially vulnerable because it is relatively unpatrolled. People have lost the foundation of their livelihood and their culture, not to mention a fundamental source of protein, health and security in their communities.

It poses a challenge: as the world’s population continues to grow, how do we help more communities secure their own natural resources and manage them sustainably, in order to avoid the conflicts that Captain Phillips lays bare?

The answer comes in stories large and small.

I have visited the shorelines of Mozambique in Coastal East Africa, where WWF has worked for a decade in partnership with CARE and local communities to restore fisheries and coral reefs and introduce new sustainable fishing and farming techniques. We’ve helped the government create Primeiras e Segundas, the largest marine protected area in Africa, and we continue to help communities manage and enforce these zones.

Fifteen years ago people here caught fish the size of their thumbs. Their children suffered from high rates of malnutrition. Now their nets bring in more, bigger fish. I have seen the dramatic results that thoughtful conservation can bring.

My own conviction is that national governments should support all efforts to stop the illegal and unregulated fishing, which lead to overexploited stocks—conditions largely credited with creating the trend of piracy in Somalia more than 20 years ago. Correspondingly, global corporations should make it their business to know how and from where their seafood supply chains are sourced—to ensure that they don’t unwittingly support illegal fishing.

And organizations like WWF, and our partners, should continue to support local leaders in conceiving and delivering smart, sustainable solutions that last.

If we do so, there is hope—hope that coastal communities in Africa and elsewhere will have a different story to tell. And hope of an ending that offers greater security for communities in coastal Africa, and all around the world. President and CEO View all issues h