Tigers are found in amazingly diverse habitats: rain forests, grasslands, savannas and even mangrove swamps. Unfortunately, 93% of historical tiger lands have disappeared primarily because of expanding human activity. Saving tigers means saving forests that are vital to the health of the planet. You can help by taking action to save tiger forests. There are two subspecies of tiger, commonly referred to as the continental tiger and the Sunda island tiger. All remaining island tigers are found only in Sumatra, with tigers in Java and Bali now extinct. These are popularly known as Sumatran tigers. The continental tigers currently include the Bengal, Malayan, Indochinese, and Amur (Siberian) tiger populations, while the Caspian tiger is extinct in the wild. The South China tiger is believed to be functionally extinct. These tigers need our help. Every part of the tiger, from whisker to tail, is traded in illegal wildlife markets. WWF is urging governments to strengthen law enforcement, invest in more boots on the ground, and commit to long-term demand reduction efforts to stop wildlife crime. Tigers are the largest of all Asian big cats, weighing in at up to 660 pounds. The smallest of tiger subspecies—the Sumatran tiger—weighs about 310 pounds at most. Within each subspecies, the males are heavier than the females. Tigers are solitary animals, with the exception of mothers and their cubs. Individual tigers roam across large areas, also known as home ranges, the size of which is determined by the availability of food. Tigers don’t patrol their range, but they do mark their domain with urine and feces over a period of days or weeks to let other tigers know that the space is occupied. Much like the human fingerprint, tiger stripes are unique to each individual. Scientists set up staggered camera traps that snap photos of each side of the tiger. With this method, they can identify individuals and properly count the population in certain areas. Counting tigers and determining where they live is a critical step in monitoring the progress we are making to protect the species. Tigers have been known to live to the age of 26 in the wild. Female tigers give birth to two to four cubs at a time, on average, and can do so every two years. Survival is difficult for cubs; about half of all cubs do not live more than two years. Support tigers and other species. Sign on to stop wildlife crime. Support tigers and other species. Sign on to stop wildlife crime.