The greater one-horned rhino is listed as Vulnerable by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), with around 3,700 individuals left in the wild. There were only around 200 individuals at the beginning of the 20th century, but strict protection and management actions from Indian and Nepalese wildlife authorities and partners have brought the species back from the brink of extinction. Javan, Sumatran, and black rhinos are Critically Endangered—there are only around 74 Javan rhinos, less than 80 Sumatran rhinos, and around 5,500 black rhinos remaining in the wild. According to the IUCN, white rhinos are Near Threatened, with approximately 18,000 individuals. Rhino horn is often ground up and used in traditional Asian medicines and is thought to treat a range of ailments from fevers to cancer. Its use as a status symbol to display success and wealth is also increasingly common. Unfortunately, the illegal trade of rhino horn throughout Asia, principally in China and Viet Nam, continues to persist and threaten wild rhinos despite the international ban on the trade of their horn. Rhino horn is made of keratin, the same substance as human hair and fingernails. Rhinos are born without horns, but within just a couple of months, a tiny stub appears—and their horns continue to grow for the rest of their lives. There are three key things that can be done to conserve rhinos: protect the individuals, protect their habitat, and establish new populations through translocation to areas that historically held rhinos. WWF supports these conservation actions on the ground. Specifically, through community-based conservation approaches, we are building support for rhino conservation in local communities and supporting local people in their desire to become even stronger custodians of these magnificent animals. WWF also supports habitat management efforts to ensure ecosystem health for rhinos and works with governments and other partners to expand rhino range. Lastly, in order to tackle the illegal trade of—and demand for—rhino horn, WWF educates consumers through demand reduction campaigns and collaborates with international governments to strengthen local and international law enforcement and protection efforts. Learn more about rhinos. Learn more about rhinos.