Bees are busy fighting climate change Bees have a reputation for doing five things really well: pollinating flowers, making honey, buzzing, and stinging. Oh, and flying: They are pretty great at that too. And while it is true that many of the world’s 20,000 or more species of bee do all these things and much more, they rarely receive the credit they deserve for their integral role in fighting climate change. You might even say that bees are unsung climate heroes, especially when it comes to their role in preserving the health of threatened ecosystems and grasslands like the Northern Great Plains. The multitude of bees and other pollinators that help keep grasslands healthy are essential partners in maintaining a stable climate. Here’s how: Superpower: Creating seeds for diversity While bees are often celebrated for their vital contributions to producing the food we eat, it is easy to forget that they are also instrumental in seed production for the thousands of species of flowering plants growing within forests, prairies, wetlands, and more. Let’s take a moment to consider their role in grassland ecosystems. Scientists estimate that bees have been around for an estimated 130 million years, appearing, at least evolutionarily speaking, not so long after the first flowers bloomed. Once these two famous partners teamed up, they embarked on a shared journey of rapid speciation together resulting in the approximately 20,000 species of bees and astounding 400,000 species of flowering plants that have been identified so far. A secret superpower : Improving soil health You can be a superhero too: What each of us can do to help bees WWF works on behalf of grasslands, native bees, and other pollinators by partnering with the sustainable ranching community, Native Nations, and other grasslands champions. We actively support policies that reduce pesticides and incentivize efforts to keep grasslands intact a restore those which have been disturbed or plowed up in the past. There is also a lot that you too can do to care for bees and other insect climate heroes in your own community: since they are pretty much all around us!