WWF’s South Africa program provides a stirring example of the power of local leadership. WWF-South Africa’s CEO, Morné du Plessis, is one of the country’s leading scientists. His team generates some of the greatest innovations in conservation. Their national watershed program plants trees and removes invasives, restoring watersheds that nourish crops and rivers upon which populations across this rich and diverse country depend. An innovative partnership saves land surrounding the legendary vineyards of Stellenbosch. They’ve created online partnerships to guide consumers to sustainable purchases. And just recently they helped the government establish Africa’s first offshore marine protected area, with the protection of the Prince Edward Islands—an extraordinary success almost seven years in the making. Each one of these initiatives was created to solve a local challenge, developed with homegrown talent and nurtured by the right kind of relationships. WWF’s dream is to have powerful country programs like South Africa’s across the continent, and in Asia and Latin America, with local talent and partnerships that provide fertile ground for innovation and conservation at scale. Our membership rightly holds us accountable for bending the trajectory of deforestation and fisheries loss, for slowing the pace of climate change and for preventing the extinction of species. And our success against these daunting obstacles rests ultimately on not only identifying the most consequential interventions here at home and abroad, but also on building the necessary capacity in places where local leaders know best how to make great things happen— places like South Africa, China, Myanmar, Vietnam and Mozambique. After all, to local leaders and their communities, these extraordinary places we seek to save are more than just ecosystems or biological hotspots. These places are their homes, the center of their lives, their livelihoods and their legacies. No one is more invested in their long- term sustainability than the people who know these places best. The world does indeed look very different depending on where you sit. From where I sit, investing in local leadership is one of the smartest ways to remain relevant in a changing world. So take a seat, grab your tablet or go online. Explore the inaugural issue of World Wildlife magazine and see things in a whole new way, through the eyes of conservation leaders in some of the most important places in the world. President and CEO View all issues h