In Malaysian Borneo, a newly restored native forest is providing food and shelter for critically endangered orangutans Few places on Earth can match the biodiversity of Borneo. The world’s third largest island is home to at least 1,136 animal species, as well as some 15,000 species of plants. A large proportion are endemic to Borneo, meaning they are found nowhere else in the world ­– including the Bornean orangutan. Borneo, including its neighboring Malaysian island of Sumatra, are the only two places in the world with wild orangutans. But as the island’s forests have been degraded by logging and cleared for palm oil plantations, the orangutan ­­­­­– whose name in Malay means “man of the forest” – has lost huge expanses of its habitat. In turn its population has more than halved in 40 years, making the Bornean orangutan critically endangered, just a step below extinction. In 1973, the Borneo was home to an estimated 288,500 orangutans. By 2012, their numbers had dropped by almost two-thirds, to 104,700, and the decline has continued.

The population is expected to fall further to 47,000 by 2025 if steps are not taken to protect this species. But all is not lost. In a small northern corner of the island, a WWF restoration project has shown that it's possible to turn things around. “Trees that were planted 10 years ago are now fruiting and have become a source of food and shelter for the orangutans,” says William Joseph, part of the WWF-Malaysia reforestation program team. “We noticed more baby orangutans were seen after 5-10 years of restoration.” “Today, the landscape is beautiful and filled with trees,” agrees his colleague Zuraimi Rahman. “If before it would have been difficult to spot an orangutan nest, that is not the case today. Restoration gives not only the forest a second chance, but also its wildlife inhabitants.” WWF has just published a report detailing the lessons learned from 12 years of forest restoration in Bukit Piton – the latest in a series of reports on forest landscape restoration projects around the world. While protecting existing habitats remains vital, it is clear that restoring forests has an important role to play in halting and reversing the loss of nature. In Sabah, the palm oil industry recently committed to planting a million trees over the next decade to help rehabilitate forests in the Ulu Segama-Malua landscape. “The lessons of Bukit Piton should be an example in Sabah and the rest of the world because it shows that restoration works and that it can successfully provide for wildlife as well as breathe new life into the existing ecosystem,” adds Zuraimi. “The success of Bukit Piton is something that we should all be proud of.”