So in that problem—deforestation and forest degradation—lies the solution: If we keep forests standing, we sequester carbon and reduce emissions. At a broader scale, protecting, managing, and restoring natural and altered ecosystems—from the Amazon to the Arctic, from seabeds to grasslands—are nature-based solutions to the climate crisis that can provide added benefits— such as food security, public health, and clean drinking water. “The climate crisis has given us an opportunity to step back and look at humanity’s relationship with nature and the ecosystems that support us,” says Marcene Mitchell, WWF’s senior vice president for climate change. “Nature-based solutions embody the need to shift from separate conversations about addressing biodiversity, climate, or water to a more holistic approach—one that moves us toward a sustainable living environment for all life on Earth.” “Nature-based solutions are often seen as just being about climate mitigation or offsets,” says Lucas Black, WWF vice president for climate finance. “But for us, they’re about a long-lasting relationship with a landscape or a seascape that addresses financing needs in their entirety and creates multiple benefits for people. Climate mitigation is just one of many benefits.” Braña Varela agrees. “Serving people and nature is a central part of our work, along with climate impacts,” she says. “For example, we need to ensure that the frenzy around carbon markets doesn’t lead to a disregard for Indigenous rights.” “We need long-lasting partnerships on the ground,” says Braña Varela, “with an eye to balancing the needs of nature, people, and climate. It’s the difference between measuring carbon only versus ensuring benefits are shared with local people, monitoring whether biodiversity is increasing, assessing the trade-offs, etc.” “We need long-lasting partnerships on the ground,” says Braña Varela, “with an eye to balancing the needs of nature, people, and climate. It’s the difference between measuring carbon only versus ensuring benefits are shared with local people, monitoring whether biodiversity is increasing, assessing the trade-offs, etc.” “We have to also look at water provisioning and quality, soil health—we look at the benefits and risks in the entirety,” says Black. “It’s not just tons of carbon sequestered or avoided emissions, it’s greater good, valuing and protecting natural capital on the ground based in rigorous science and metrics.” In practice, WWF’s approach to nature-based solutions is holistic, landscape-based, and community-centered. Ensuring that interventions deliver real, lasting gains for nature and people requires Carbon credits (also referred to sometimes as “carbon offsets”) can be another way to promote nature-based efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. A carbon credit is a virtual unit representing the ability to emit one ton of CO2. So carbon credit projects can either sequester carbon from the atmosphere in quantifiable amounts or prevent carbon from being emitted in quantifiable amounts. These units can be sold to buyers—corporations, governments, individuals—who may want to comply with government policies or use them toward voluntary sustainability goals. For example, let’s say a farmer in North Carolina has 100 acres of peatland, and the farmer invests in both the science to measure how much carbon the peatland is storing and in protecting the peatland from being disturbed in a way that would cause the carbon to be released. If the project meets the right requirements, it can be enrolled in a carbon crediting program. Other common types of projects that can be financed through carbon credit programs include improved cookstoves, landfill gas mitigation, and interventions that harness the natural carbon storage potential of landscapes and seascapes, like terrestrial reforestation or mangrove restoration. To be effective, carbon credits need to be priced appropriately and must reflect the true social costs of carbon, says WWF’s Braña Varela. But ultimately, she says, “there is no longer any room for excuses and avoiding action. We have to stop emitting and move toward nature-based solutions across the board.” “We need long-lasting partnerships on the ground, with an eye to balancing the needs of nature, people, and climate.” Since 2019, technology company HP Inc. has helped fund forest restoration in Brazil’s Atlantic Forest, with the goal of restoring more than 1,000 acres. To date, more than 66,000 tree seedlings have been planted and 37 freshwater springs have been protected on 313 acres in collaboration with rural landowners and dozens of local organizations. WWF planning and analysis ensures restored plots knit together to enhance the entire region, with the aim of helping the landscape supply more water to its human and animal inhabitants while trees sequester planet-warming carbon dioxide. In October 2021, HP announced an $80 million expansion of its partnership with WWF, seeking to restore, protect, and improve the management of nearly 1 million forested acres around the world by 2030. The company has already addressed its own direct environmental impacts— committing to carbon neutral operations by 2025, for example, and ensuring that its own paper and paper-based packaging are deforestation-free and come from Forest Stewardship Council®-certified and recycled sources. Now HP has set out to defray the impacts of the 17 million metric tons of paper projected to pass through its printers over the next 10 years—regardless of whether that paper is produced by HP. A transformative $100 million grant to WWF from the Bezos Earth Fund aims to accelerate some of the most promising nature-based solutions. The 2020 grant supports three types of work: protecting and restoring mangroves in Colombia, Fiji, Madagascar, and Mexico; developing new markets for seaweed, such as for animal feed and biodegradable plastics; and protecting forests and other ecosystems that can harness the power of nature to stabilize the climate. A public-private partnership launched in Peru in 2017 with the support of the Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation (Norad) aims to reduce deforestation in the Amazonian province of Tahuamanu, an agricultural frontier. A pilot program led by WWF and local and regional governments and organizations engaged 10 local ranchers in identifying and implementing best practices to increase productivity while decreasing forest clearing and other ecological impacts of livestock management. The livestock producers not only transformed their own practices; they set the stage for large-scale change. Through the efforts of pilot participants and with the backing of the Ministry of Agricultural Development and Irrigation and other state actors, 200 additional ranchers have received support to implement the identified best practices. “We cannot address the climate crisis without also addressing the nature crisis. these twin challenges are inextricably linked, which is why we are doubling down on solutions that solve for both—ones that make peoples’ lives better now and in the future.” View all issues h