Report cards are a proven conservation tool, and their development has traditionally been led by external experts. In the Orinoco basin, the University of Maryland’s Center for Environmental Science (UMCES) and WWF are supporting a different take on report cards by creating a process that’s locally led. The result will contribute to the development of an open-source model that can be adopted by river basin inhabitants and managers almost anywhere in the world. Around the bend, in the bustling port town of Puerto Carreño, dolphins are far from the thoughts of the fishermen gathered at the water’s edge. The men move easily in the pre-dawn light, readying their nets and calling out wisecracks from boat to boat. Among the bustle, 65-year-old lifelong fisherman Clímaco Unda Barrios prepares his small wooden motorboat, occasionally allowing one of the jokes to tease a smile from his weathered face. After setting off through the narrow channels of a nearby lagoon, he joins dozens of men in rubber boots, sloshing through thigh-high water, dragging large green fishing nets. From time to time they pause to examine their catch, picking out tiny, jumping jewels with dirty fingers. These bright, colorful, “ornamental” fish from marshlands along the river’s edge are captured alive and stored in water-filled plastic grocery bags until the fishers reach shore. Sold to bulk buyers, they can be shipped by air as far away as the United States or Japan, involuntarily trading their wild habitat for a starring role in a distant fish tank. And the men who caught them make enough to sustain their families through a combination of selling and eating their catch—for now. “Fishing has given me the chance to educate my children—everything I have, I got from fishing,” says Unda Barrios. Like most of his colleagues, he says he could never do anything else. Which is why changes in fish populations are cause for action. “People say that these days there’s fewer arowana, fewer needlefish, but they don’t know why,” he says, guessing the rise in agriculture might be a reason. He remembers when there used to be lots of fish in sections of the river that became lifeless after the cotton farmers moved in. Other fishermen trade anecdotes about smaller catches and blame bitter-tasting fish on farmers upriver dumping chemicals into the water—but they have little data about environmental damage, and few tools to galvanize their neighbors to take conservation seriously. “That’s where the report cards can come in,” Freeman explains. “We are trying to provide information in a way that’s very digestible, very understandable for people. Information is power, so report cards can become a tool for communities to use to put pressure on their leaders, or ask for money to actually do something that’s going to make a difference in their lives.” Unda Barrios is skeptical of interventions by environmental groups, but says he’s willing to do whatever it takes to protect the river. He also acknowledges that his community doesn’t really know if the river is healthy or not, and that if it’s not healthy, he’s not sure what can be done. So, he admits, the basin report card holds some appeal. “We’ve seen report cards drive change,” says Bill Dennison, Costanzo’s colleague and a professor (and vice president for science application) at UMCES, which has been creating report cards around the world for over 10 years. For him, report cards ought to function like a car’s dashboard. While indicators like speed don’t offer a complete diagnostic of a car, they can provide lots of clues. Costanzo has pinpointed the reason UMCES and WWF are working together—to package and share the report card development process in an open, inclusive way. Through this partnership, both organizations hope to empower local stakeholders to develop reliable, efficient, and effective report cards in their basins, thus dramatically improving how water is managed around the world. Their first stop: Colombia’s Orinoco basin, where the 1,330-mile river cuts a shimmering border between Colombia and Venezuela. The data available so far is being used to determine “whether the basin is entering a period of sickness,” says José Saulo Usma, freshwater program coordinator for WWF-Colombia, “and if it’s threatened, we think there’s still time to maintain or improve the river’s health.” “The basin report card,” he continues, “will give us the opportunity to measure quantitatively, with the variables we already have, the health of the river. What are the environmental, social, and economic costs of the development that we’ll see here?” Because development is coming. “This area has been slated by the government as a promised land for development, so we know that the pressures are going to increase,” WWF’s Freeman says. “If we can start raising awareness of that now and create a dialogue—an avenue by which people can have their ideas of what’s going on actually informed by science—this should, in the end, help create a better basis for sustainable development in the basin.” The captain, the conservationist, and the report card facilitators all agree on one thing: This process, and the final product it provides, might just offer proof that the government, the people of Puerto Carreño, and the dolphins can thrive together. “If it can show that one thing influences another—for example, that water quality influences the fisheries, the communities’ water supply, the dolphin population, the turtle populations, and so on—and if it helps the fishermen go from just fishing for money to caring for the environment and good management of the river,” Martinez Callejas says, as one hand trails in the cool water, “then this basin report card will be a very good tool.” View all issues h