At the top of the agenda for WWF—and for the Biden Administration—is the need to reestablish and revitalize US leadership on the climate crisis, both at home and abroad. In the first few months of the Administration, we saw a flurry of activity, with the US immediately rejoining the Paris Agreement and the President taking a series of executive actions to create a whole-of-government response. This included the establishment of a special envoy for climate change, an interagency task force on climate change, and a climate policy office within the White House. The US also announced an enhanced climate commitment to reduce emissions by 50%-52% by 2030 and pledged to quadruple US international climate finance commitments by 2024, which aligned closely with WWF’s goals. To back up these commitments, President Biden’s Build Back Better plan and corresponding legislation introduced in Congress included historic new investments to achieve US climate targets, as well as measures to advance climate justice and protect the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge from oil and gas development. The Build Back Better Act passed the House but remains stalled in the Senate. Getting it to the President’s desk with its climate provisions intact remains a top priority for WWF. We will also work to advance policies and legislation to reduce emissions in specific sectors of the economy, including the aviation and industrial sectors. Getting it to the President’s desk with its climate provisions intact remains a top priority for WWF We saw strong positive movement over the past year around US efforts to phase out the use of unnecessary plastics and other materials and implement strong recycling and reuse systems. The US announced support for a global treaty to tackle plastic waste and revised its national recycling strategy to include source reduction and environmental justice concerns, looking to eliminate the disproportionate burden our plastic waste crisis bears on underserved communities. WWF also collaborated with private sector partners to launch the OneSource Coalition, comprised of 16 companies and partner organizations. This year, our efforts will increasingly focus on the passage of legislation, such as the Break Free from Plastic Pollution Act, to give agencies the authority and direction to reform the US recycling system and create a circular economy. phase out the use of unnecessary plastics and other materials In 2021, we were able to work with a new Administration and make great strides on WWF’s conservation and climate policy agenda. Still, we have significant work to do to fully achieve our goals, including through the passage of critical legislation. This year, we’ll focus on ensuring that Congress delivers on the work that is underway and that the Administration continues to champion global conservation efforts. As always, we can’t do this alone: our partnerships, supporters, and activists will be key to our success in securing US government action. We recognize that the next 12 months are pivotal in our fight to save the planet, and we believe that, by working together, we can achieve the ambitious goals that we have set.