When NASA’s Apollo 11 launched into orbit carrying the first people that would step foot on the moon, the mission inspired the neologism “moonshot”: an idea so ambitious or groundbreaking it can change the trajectory of human civilization. Almost fifty years later, the term has come to represent the human capacity to find radical solutions to big problems using breakthrough technology. In Silicon Valley, for instance, Google and its experimental subsidiary lab, X, have famously championed moonshot thinking to beget such innovations as Project Loon (a network of balloons designed to provide internet access to remote areas) and self-driving cars. But can the game-changing ideas fostered by the tech industry also tackle the daunting challenges now facing the world’s oceans? WWF’s senior vice president for oceans, Brad Ack, thinks so. “Oceans X Labs aspires to combine the incredible power of emergent technologies, the power of creative thinkers, and the power of markets to find, develop, and scale new solutions that can transform ocean conservation efforts.” Ack is one of the organizing minds behind Oceans X Labs, the world’s first conservation incubator and accelerator designed to develop ocean conservation innovations that can be scaled up to make a measurable impact. Launched in 2015, Oceans X Labs is a joint initiative of WWF and Conservation X Labs that, drawing on the venture tech model, aims to support and encourage innovators as they develop new approaches to addressing some of the ocean’s biggest problems, including overfishing, pollution, poorly managed aquaculture, and our vulnerable coasts. “Oceans X Labs aspires to combine the incredible power of emergent technologies, the power of creative thinkers, and the power of markets to find, develop, and scale new solutions that can transform ocean conservation efforts,” says Ack. In 2016, WWF helped launch the inaugural Blue Economy Challenge to identify new approaches to aquaculture, and to connect Oceans X Labs with pioneering thinkers around the world. By the end of the competition, 221 innovators from 41 countries had submitted innovations that focused on replacing wild fish in fishmeal using algae, microbes, and insects, and on creating new food products from seaweed. One of the top candidates singled out to participate in the Oceans X Labs tech incubator was New Wave Foods, a San Francisco-based seafood startup that has engineered a vegan, kosher, plant-based shrimp using red algae from the ocean. Their goal? To disrupt the seafood market by providing an alternative to the ever-growing and unsustainable demand for shrimp. New Wave Foods is a partnership between chief executive officer Dominique Barnes, a graduate of marine conservation at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography, and chief technology officer Michelle Wolf, a bio materials engineer. The two met at a business incubator for synthetic biology startups where they discovered a shared dream: to find a way to make seafood healthier and more sustainable. “We knew we wanted to make seafood alternatives together, and it was pretty easy for us to focus on shrimp. It’s not only the number one seafood consumed in the US, it’s really the poster child for some of the problems in our seafood supply chains right now. Farmed shrimp are often fed antibiotics or raised in dense aquaculture operations in sensitive coastal areas, and with little oversight,” says Wolf. “We thought, there has to be a better way to raise shrimp—and to have a big environmental impact.” View all issues h