A single, measurable goal
unifies the parties A holistic deal structure ensures
that all necessary conditions for
permanence are agreed to, and
that all stakeholders meet their
own objectives A high-capacity nonprofit helps
secure the partnership A set of core partners shares
fundraising responsibilities A financial plan estimates the full
costs into perpetuity A full-cost fundraising effort
ensures permanent funding A “deal broker” leads stakeholder
engagement and drives the process A set of formal closing conditions
ensures completeness A set of formal disbursement milestones
ensures ongoing compliance A single closing lends urgency,
creates leverage for every entity
involved, and thereby draws out
new resources and commitments Source: “A Big Deal for Conservation,” Summer 2012, Stanford Social Innovation Review. Enter Larry Linden, who after years as a partner at the multinational investment banking firm Goldman Sachs, was preparing to resign with a secret, wildly ambitious agenda in mind. “I wanted to slow down the rate at which we are destroying the planet,” Linden says. But despite a background in pollution control, engineering, management consulting and public policy, in addition to finance—he wasn’t sure how he was going to turn that goal into a reality. Then Leape called, and the ARPA team began to grow. Describing a project to save the Amazon rain forest that was 200 times bigger than anything WWF had done before, Leape said he was looking for someone from the private sector who knew how to lead multi-hundred-million-dollar projects. While Linden wasn’t familiar with biodiversity or ecosystem conservation, he did know what was required to make a project of that size a success: a specific and detailed financial plan. The first stop for information on what would become the backbone of the ARPA model was Wall Street. “I went around Goldman Sachs,” Linden says, “and talked to people who had run big project finance deals and asked them what the best practices were. I’d done big systems conversions,” he says. “I ran Goldman’s Y2K program, led the merger of two big companies and a lot of other large-scale projects, but I’d never done project finance. My Wall Street peers really pitched in with advice.” The Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation also lent critical support at ARPA’s founding, delivering both funding and strategic insight into creating a mechanism strong enough to deliver such an ambitious goal. That core team decided that what was best for ARPA was a specially tailored version of project finance, one that included the disciplines of financial planning, risk management, financial controls, donor disclosure and reporting, asset management and highly structured project organization. And the approach reaped incredible results over 10 years, including nearly 100 protected areas covering 128 million acres. But even with Brazil’s steadfast engagement through the terms of President Cardoso and his successor, President Lula, as well as the stalwart support of ARPA’s funders, the key end-goal—permanent financial sustainability—had not been secured. In fact, no conservation project of this scale had ever before been fully funded. So in 2010, a new financing plan and deal structure—organized around the high-risk idea of a single all-or-nothing closing—was developed with a fundraising target of $215 million to ensure that ARPA’s protected areas could fully function over the long term. Usually used in multifaceted private-sector projects with several stakeholders, such single closings call on donors to commit the necessary funds—but hold off on actually delivering those funds until all resources and other necessary conditions for the project can be met. Then the funds are called in and the deal is “closed.” This way, each donor gains tremendous leverage because the entire deal package relies on each donor, and no single entity need take the risk that their funding flows if other required funding or arrangements are not attained. This makes the entire project more attractive—and draws enthusiasm and funding that might otherwise hang back. Here, Linden notes the catalytic power of a founding gift from Roger and Vicki Sant. “We could not have pulled this off without the extreme generosity of Roger and Vicki,” he says. “Their early gift was critical in securing the other private sources of funding we’ve since received.” After the boat bumps up onto the shore of the Balbina Lake island, we make our way across the golden brown sand to what looks like a doorway leading into the thick forest on our left. The trees begin to rustle as Klein emerges, stepping out onto the beach with the rest of the group. He has been clearing a path with a stick longer than he is tall so we can follow him into the unknown. That image prompts someone to comment that he looks like Tom Hanks in Cast Away. He smiles sheepishly at the comparison. He is, after all, not lost. The Brazilian tapir (Tapirus terrestris) is classified as vulnerable to extinction due to a 30% decline in its population over the last 30 years. That drop in numbers is linked primarily to habitat loss caused by deforestation and land conversion for agriculture. The Amazon’s largest mammal, the tapir lives in nearly all ARPA protected areas, and benefits from ongoing efforts to conserve and consolidate its historical range. This deep, daily engagement on the part of the Brazilian government and leaders such as Izabella Teixeira and Francisco Gaetani of Brazil’s Ministry of the Environment, as well as the Brazilian parks agency, the Chico Mendes Institute for Biodiversity Conservation, and Funbio (the Brazilian Biodiversity Fund), is absolutely central to ARPA’s success on the ground. And it is only with that firm commitment—from initial announcement to the ongoing support of President Dilma Rousseff who leads Brazil today—that the Amazon still holds ecological treasures rich, vast and secure enough to keep the Amazon thriving forever. One of our Uatumã guides—wearing flip-flops and carrying a machete—tells us about the time he had to cut the head off a poisonous snake here before it bit him. If you’re not quick, he says, you won’t last long in the Amazon. While the smiles on everybody’s faces suggest they might doubt the details of his tale, what they don’t question is the importance of ARPA to the region where the snakes, millions of people, and billions of plants and animals do undoubtedly live. “The most direct benefits of the biological reserve are the stabilization and protection of the margins of Balbina Lake,” says Sergio Henrique Collaco de Carvalho, environmental analyst and ARPA director of protected areas for the Ministry of Environment. “There could be a larger loss in quality of water here, but [ARPA] guarantees the protection of these margins and the way we run the Balbina reserve.” “When I first started to work on ARPA, I was motivated by the enormous possibilities for conservation design. The Amazon was nearly an open canvas due to its scale, and very few people have the opportunity to look at a map and plan a conservation landscape. The demonstrated success of the program keeps me involved, and I truly believe we are changing the face and the future of the Brazilian Amazon for the better.” Rosa Lemos De Sãá

Secretary General and CEO,
Fundo Brasileiro para a Biodiversidade (FUNBIO) Rosa Lemos De Sãá “The Amazon is the quintessential definition of biodiversity. And ARPA is the right tool to protect it. First, President Cardoso made the commitment to the effort. Then WWF ran with it. What everyone recognizes is that the Amazon is the model of what we’re trying to save around the world. The Brazilian Amazon is what we’re talking about now, but clearly a part of our dream here is that it will expand to other parts of the Amazon. And our ultimate hope is that if we can get this done in the Amazon, then the model will expand to other ecoregions as well.” Roger W. Sant
WWF Board Member Chairman Emeritus & Co-Founder,
The AES Corporation Roger W. Sant “ Our late founder, Margaret Cargill, believed in conserving places for wildlife by working with the communities that live in and around those places. ARPA for Life is built to deliver site-specific results at the local scale, while advancing an entire regional network of well-designed protected areas. The project also focuses on using philanthropic support to develop a self-sustaining program. All of these factors reflect our funding philosophy.” Christine M. Morse
Chair and CEO,
Margaret A. Cargill Foundation Christine M. Morse “This program is different from other conservation programs for several reasons. One is its size. It is of huge global consequence.…What we’re doing here is ensuring that…all 150 million acres of these protected areas actually have the infrastructure that they need, the staffing that they need, the relationships with local communities that they need, the research so that they are able to prevent deforestation. This is how a parks system should be.” Tom Dillon
Senior Vice President,
Forests and Fresh Water, WWF Tom Dillon “ One of the defining qualities of the Moore Foundation’s conservation work is our ability to see ambitious projects through to fruition and ensure that those achievements last. ARPA for Life provides an unprecedented opportunity to ensure the durability of Brazil’s protected areas in the Amazon. We are delighted to partner with WWF to create and implement this innovative solution to secure the long-term viability of this important protected areas system.” Guillermo Castilleja
Chief Program Officer,
Environmental Conservation Program
Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation Guillermo Castilleja “ARPA, for me principally, is a project for life. It’s a collective international force with unbelievable cooperation. It’s an exchange of experiences with a lot of interaction among all the different players. I see it as an example of international and national cooperation with concrete results that can be shown to donor, the Brazilian public and citizens of donor countries.” Adriana Moreira
Senior Environmental Specialist,
World Bank Adriana Moreira “It has been confirmed that ARPA slowed the arc of deforestation—the steady encroachment of logging and agriculture into the Amazon—in Brazil, and slowed overall deforestation rates. That success, measured in territorial coverage, management results, social inclusiveness and funds raised, has become a reference point for conservation worldwide. New protected area endowment funds continue to be developed in ARPA’s wake, expanding its impact on new landscapes and regions across Brazil. ” Maria Cecília Wey De Brito
CEO,
WWF-Brazil Maria Cecília Wey De Brito “Within the scope of ARPA’s approach, KfW is particularly interested to save the biggest freshwater supply in the world, to maintain biodiversity in the Amazon forest, and to contain CO2 emissions deriving from illegal deforestation. …WWF had long-term and very solid on-the-ground experience in the Amazon with regard to the preservation of tropical forests and biodiversity—thematic expertise that made it possible to conduct the necessary discussions with the Brazilian authorities, private donors in the United States…and to arrive at a mutually acceptable common approach.” Hubert Eisele
Senior Project Manager, Tropical Forests,
KfW German Development Bank Hubert Eisele “ARPA changed my life. As my first social sector work it showed me how satisfying it is to use consulting skills to do good. It also taught me the lesson of humility in the face of enormous complexity—a lesson that I am reminded of almost every day I work on social issues. I may have forgone some earning opportunities, but I have had the most interesting decade of my life and have been able to contribute at least modestly to a better world for all of us and the generations to come.” Ivan Barkhorn
Redstone Strategy Group Ivan Barkhorn “ The question of replicating ARPA is no longer a theoretical discussion. Already in Brazil, the ARPA model is being replicated in the Marine and Coastal Protected Areas project, which aims to increase marine areas under protection by 70%. The concepts used in the implementation of ARPA are starting to inspire similar approaches to key ecosystems around the world, such as Africa’s Serengeti.” Naoko Ishii
CEO and Chairperson,
Global Environment Facility Naoko Ishii “ARPA takes a holistic approach to conservation. It starts with the science of identifying the areas that are important to conserve, then it moves on to establishing those protected areas, and then providing the resources needed to make sure those areas are effectively managed over the long term. Financial sustainability has been a part of ARPA’s strategy from the very beginning, and that’s something not always found in conservation initiatives—and it is a strength.” Meg Symington
Amazon Managing Director,
WWF Meg Symington A project of this scale, complexity and duration could not have been successfully completed without tremendous commitment on thepart of many. Because it would be impossible to recognize each of the countless contributors who have helped ensure ARPA’s success in this limited space, WWF also thanks all those who have supported ARPA for their immeasurable aid. Amazon Fund


Anonymous Donors


The Government of Brazil


Ministry of the
Environment: Brazil


Margaret A. Cargill Foundation


Funbio: The Brazilian Biodiversity Fund Joseph and Carson Gleberman


Global Environment Facility


Inter-American
Development Bank


KfW: The German
Development Bank Linden Trust for Conservation


Chico Mendes Institute for Biodiversity Conservation


Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation


Natura


O Botanicario Wendy and Hank Paulson


Redstone Strategy Group


Roger and Vicki Sant


WWF-Brazil


The WWF Global Network


World Bank The last time Aldeci Cerqueira Maia saw Chico Mendes, the world-renowned Brazilian rubber tapper and environmentalist, the famous man couldn’t stop smoking. “Look everyone: I could die at any time,” Mendes told Maia and the others at the meeting in Sena Madureira, a small town in the northern state of Acre. “If I do die, I hope you’ll carry on with this work.” Maia, who is better known as Nenzinho, nodded in agreement. Mendes knew smoking was a bad habit, but he couldn’t stop. A remnant from his childhood treks into the Amazon rain forest with his father, Mendes’s vice started because of the cigarette smoke that was used to repel mosquitoes from feasting on the rubber tappers and their young sons as they worked. View all issues h