This piece was originally published by WWF-Asia Pacific Exposure. Jack Sagumai studied marine biology and made it his life’s purpose to restore the ocean’s health. He grew up in a coastal community in Papua New Guinea and now works with WWF and community members to collect scientific data on sharks and rays in the area. According to Jack, most people in his country no longer care about the ocean the way their ancestors did, and he wants this to change. Here, he shares his story. Jack Sagumai studied marine biology and made it his life’s purpose to restore the ocean’s health. He grew up in a coastal community in Papua New Guinea and now works with WWF and community members to collect scientific data on sharks and rays in the area. According to Jack, most people in his country no longer care about the ocean the way their ancestors did, and he wants this to change. Here, he shares his story. What was it like to grow up by the sea? What was it like to grow up by the sea? I grew up near the beach, where I went swimming, fishing, and diving with my friends at a very young age. Once, we saw dolphins near the shore and we ran along the beach while singing in the Manam Motu language: “Dolphins, dolphins: throw your babies out of the water so we can see them.” We were amazed when the baby dolphins indeed jumped out of the water! It was a beautiful moment that I will never forget. Growing up, I learned that the ocean was the supplier of almost all of our needs, but also a dangerous place. We have to be careful, but going out there is inevitable: we rely on seafood, especially fish, which is a main ingredient of our diet. The ocean also brings us seeds that grow into new trees and logs that serve as firewood or timber to build houses. We use offshore seawater to create “makasi,” a drink that people – especially men – consume to detox, it makes them look younger. What has changed since you were a child? What has changed since you were a child? In the old days, traditional beliefs and cultural practices ensured a sustainable use of resources and people respected the ocean. There were fewer people and they consumed less; most of them were living a simple lifestyle. Now, money is more important in the communities and the area’s population has increased, creating a negative impact on marine life. The demand for products that are already over-exploited, such as sea cucumber, is growing. More people means more food. It is not easy for the community members to feed their families: they take whatever size fish they can catch to put food on the table. I have seen photos of endangered leatherback turtles and sharks being killed for food by communities in my area. People sometimes even eat dolphins and dugongs—both rarely seen near the shores—in order to survive. Papua New Guinea, located in the famous Coral Triangle, is a marine biodiversity hotspot and new species are still being discovered in the region. Even though education levels are increasing, many people still lack the knowledge to be able to realize what is happening to the ocean. Some people simply see the ocean as the supplier of their food and a place to dispose of their garbage. But education levels are increasing in Papua New Guinea and there is a growing awareness about the sustainable use of resources. NGOs like WWF are integrating conservation with community development to make solutions sustainable and use technology to minimize the exploitation of coral reefs. Hopefully, the communities engaged in the program will inspire surrounding communities so they will replicate these initiatives.