“For my whole life I will be incredibly grateful to all who mentored me, and in particular the folks at World Wildlife Fund who drew out my ability and gave me the opportunity to help save the planet— exactly what I wanted to do.” “They were looking for someone from the private sector who had experience running multi-hundred million-dollar projects to advise them, and I’d been recommended. Was I interested?” Linden was. “I never wanted to be a checkbook philanthropist,” Linden says. “I saw this as a career change and so wanted to add real value beyond just giving money—although I did give money, because I knew it was important. But going in to WWF and saying, ‘I’ve worked at Goldman Sachs, please step aside while I save the day,’ would have been arrogant and also just erroneous. I knew I had a lot to learn.” And so he continued taking calls from Leape. He traveled to Brazil many times, and ultimately signed on to help design what became the Amazon Region Protected Areas (ARPA) program. And through Linden’s work over the years on large-scale conservation projects in Canada and Costa Rica, as well as Brazil, the model that has come to be known as Project Finance for Permanence, or PFP, took shape. PFP’s purpose is to ensure that a protected area system, once established, has the funding and other attributes needed to maintain it in perpetuity. Adapting a Wall Street-style approach to financing and closing large deals, PFPs call on investors to pledge to contribute based on a detailed financial and conservation plan. No funding is handed over until all conditions necessary for closing the deal have been met. Stars aligned, and thanks to the involvement of Linden and many others, ARPA went on to become successful beyond anyone’s wildest dreams. When the $215 million, 150 million-acre project closed two years ago, it was the largest single tropical forest conservation project in history. As far as Linden is concerned, the stars aligned for him, too. “I just can’t believe my luck,” he says. “I have some skills behind this, but for my whole life I will be incredibly grateful to all who mentored me, and in particular the folks at World Wildlife Fund who drew out my ability and gave me the opportunity to help save the planet—exactly what I wanted to do.” View all issues h