Kerry Meyer farms the hilly landscapes of Scott County, Iowa, just a mile up the road from his parents’ farm, and a few miles east of his brother’s land.

He is a tall man with broad shoulders; his forehead and his cheeks are tanned from the summer sun. Dressed in heavy leather shoes and blue jeans, he steers his silver Chevy along a gravel road bordered by grassy slopes. A sea of soy leaves yellows to his right. Corn stalks crisp on the left. It’s mid-September. “Nearly time to harvest,” he says.

But Meyer doesn’t want to plant crops on all of his land this year. Along with tens of thousands of other Iowa farmers, he’s opted to take portions of his crop acreage out of production, and put it into what’s called “CRP”—private land that’s part of the federal government’s Conservation Reserve Program. Meyer currently has 15 acres of CRP land on his 1,200-acre property, with 30 more coming later this year. Pulling his truck to the side of the road, he points out six lines of fir and spruce that he, his wife Dawn, and their son Jamey planted on a hill near their crops. Years of continuous farming have eroded the soil up there, he says, making for a bum corn yield. They planted this “shelterbelt” of trees on CRP land in place of corn with the hopes of boosting soil quality and preventing further erosion. Not to mention, Meyer says, that with the price of corn dropping and a dour sales forecast for the next several years, the trees provide some income. “[The CRP is] paying me $245 an acre each year for the next 15 years not to farm that,” he says, “and I wouldn’t want to anyway.”

Meyer’s conservation land includes the trees, as well as wetlands that filter runoff from his crops to keep excess nutrients from fertilizer from seeping into his groundwater. He maintains wildlife habitat that includes a scattering of flowering plants such as milkweed, goldenrod, and wild bergamot—plants that support the region’s pollinating insects, including the monarch butterfly.

While Iowa may not come to mind when one conjures up the famous black and burnt-orange butterflies, it is in fact a key site for monarchs who migrate between Canada and Mexico. For centuries, butterflies have been resting on Iowa’s oak and pine trees and sipping from flowering plants now found mostly in the region’s ditches, abandoned lots, and grasses. Adult butterflies lay eggs on the undersides of milkweed leaves—the only food source for their larvae.

But drought, other unpredictable weather patterns, and the conversion of grassland into cropland (for both foods and biofuels) are contributing to major declines in the numbers of nectar-producing plants—a trend pushing monarch numbers into steady decline. “The world is always going to need to be fed, but you’re also supposed to understand how nature works. [And] when you like your neighbors, you want to do the right thing.” Kerry Meyer is in a position to appreciate this option. The price of corn and other crops rises and falls in reaction to a myriad of factors; between 2012 and 2015 alone, corn plummeted in value from around seven dollars a bushel to below four dollars a bushel. That volatility makes farming hard. “I just broke even on my crops last year, in 2016,” says Meyer, adding that corn needs to be at four dollars a bushel for him to break even.

Meyer sits in his truck listening to a news show playing through the static on the radio. In what seems like serendipitous timing, he catches the end of a segment about butterflies in Iowa. “Everyone’s talking about pollinators right now,” he says.

One of the most popular CRP options, in fact, is the “pollinator strip,” known as CP-42. The option asks farmers to replace old cropland with plantings of at least three  flowering species that host bees and insects like butterflies, moths, wasps, flies, and beetles. Taken together, these insects are responsible for pollinating about a third of the food eaten in the world.

The CP-42 option became available in 2012, and the Pollinator Health Task Force began encouraging the Department of Agriculture to promote native flowers for bees and butterflies in the summer of 2014.

“Since then, awareness has definitely increased” among Corn Belt farmers, says Alan Lange, a resource conservationist at the NRCS office in Des Moines. In fact, more than 342,000 acres were enrolled in the pollinator program nationally in 2016 (about half of them, or 176,000 acres, in Iowa alone). 

By planting the nectar-producing plants on private acreage through the CRP, as well as in roadside ditches and on public lands, task force partners hope they will help ease the pollinator crisis and keep the tri-national monarch migration alive. WAYS AND MEANS

Meyer and the Williamses, like all landowners, face a multitude of choices every day about how to best steward their land. Farmers and other landowners must make decisions in response to ecological, market, and personal factors, as well as the restrictions and opportunities provided by public policy. Programs like CRP can enable farmers to incorporate conservation into their operations, and CRP’s success depends on its availability to farmers as well as its feasibility in guiding on-farm management decisions.

“The economics really need to make sense” for a farmer to keep land in CRP, says WWF senior policy specialist America May Fitzpatrick. CRP contracts come in 10- or 15-year plans. If corn and soy prices are high when that time is up, farmers are unlikely to renew; they might even attempt to cancel mid-lease. Crops equal income, and farmers have to respond to market price and policy signals to stay in business. On the other hand, even when the economics make sense on an acre-by-acre basis, demand among farmers to enroll in CRP can outpace state-defined limits on CRP acreage—meaning not every motivated farmer can participate.

And policies can change. As Iowa Senator Chuck Grassley told the Des Moines Register in 2016, “everything is on the table as the 2018 Farm Bill cycle approaches.”

Policy-makers will consider the future of a broad range of agricultural programs and policies for the benefit they offer farmers, the environment, and the public, especially when facing an uncertain future of extreme weather and climate change.

That’s why farmers like Kerry Meyer and landowners like Spin and Mindy Williams—among thousands of other stewardship-minded farmers—are so important. By doing the right thing and sharing their stories, they are demonstrating not only a public commitment to monarchs and other pollinators, but also that it’s possible to make the future success of American farming and American wildlife one and the same. WAYS AND MEANS View all issues h