Over the past 25 years, the marine ecologist at the University of California, Santa Cruz has made more than 40 research trips to this world of sea ice and rich marine life. During that time, he’s gathered insights that are reshaping science’s understanding of the whales—humpback, blue, fin, and Antarctic minke—that migrate here each summer to consume Antarctic krill, the shrimplike superfood that’s particularly abundant during the season’s long, light-filled days. Joining Friedlaender on this expedition is Natalia Botero-Acosta, the director of Macuáticos Colombia Foundation, who more often studies whales in the balmy Gulf of Tribugá along Colombia’s Pacific coast, and Chris Johnson, global lead for WWF’s Protecting Whales and Dolphins Initiative. The team—bundled in bright, thick jackets—is here to study where and how well the whales are feeding around the peninsula and hoping to identify their critical habitats. Antarctic sea ice—water that freezes, expands, and melts in the ocean—regulates the global climate, buttresses ice sheets, and circulates ocean water. It’s also the foundation of a complex food web. Phytoplankton—microscopic marine algae—bloom underneath the ice as sunlight filters through and feeds dense swarms of krill. Krill, in turn, are an essential food source for fish, penguins, seals, and baleen whales, which, depending on their size, can devour between one and 12 tons of krill per day. Scientists have been monitoring the sea ice that encircles the continent for more than 40 years, using satellites to gauge its annual maximum and minimum extent. Typically, it’s at its largest in September and its smallest in March. But as air and ocean temperatures spike, sea ice cover is hitting worrying new milestones. “This is the second year in a row where the winter sea ice in the peninsula was the lowest on record,” says Friedlaender, “which is the biggest red flag we could have.” As krill populations become locally depleted, explains Friedlaender, larger marine species will likely face increasing challenges. “Many whales have a binary lifestyle: They feed for a short period, migrate thousands of miles, then breed,” he says. “Female humpback whales need to get all the energy they can in a relatively short period while in Antarctica. From around December to April, if they can’t eat more than a ton of krill daily, it affects their breeding success.” The team published a study in 2023 that found that it’s crucial for female humpbacks to get their fill of krill a year before they become pregnant so they can gain enough fat to support gestation. In 2017, following a year with plenty of krill, 86% of sampled humpback females were pregnant, compared to 29% in 2020, following a year with less krill. To determine how well the whales are bulking up this year, the researchers used aerial photogrammetry—a technique that involves taking measurements from drone-captured photographs—to analyze the mammals’ body conditions. “We saw an unusually high number of skinny whales late in the season,” Johnson says. “That’s a concern.” Until recently, little was known about whales’ movements between the endpoints of their journeys. In the past, notes Botero-Acosta, “we had to rely on the tiny percentage of time we had with whales at the ocean’s surface and extrapolate from that.” But with GPS-capable tags, researchers can track the animals’ exact locations, mapping where they spend the most time and their migration routes. Tagging has revealed, for example, that starting around January, baleen whales in the Antarctic follow krill to feeding hotspots such as Gerlache and Bransfield Straits and the adjacent Wilhelmina and Flandres bays, which are also critical migration sites. In 2022, WWF and a host of university partners—including Oregon State University, the University of California Santa Cruz, and the University of Southampton—published Protecting Blue Corridors, a groundbreaking report synthesizing satellite tracking data from over 1,000 tags collected by more than 50 research groups over 30 years. “With that data, we have a better picture of whales and their movement patterns, some of which are seasonal and some of which are year-round,” says Johnson. “When you plot those movements on a map, you uncover whales’ blue corridors—crisscrossing superhighways that sometimes span thousands of miles.” Satellite tracking has shown that every fall, one population of Southern Hemisphere humpback whales journeys more than 5,000 miles between the west coast of South America—where females birth and nurse their young—and the Antarctic Peninsula. They swim along the Eastern Pacific Ocean corridor, one of the whale superhighways the report documents and a migratory hub also shared by a dozen species of great whales. The report additionally highlights the multiple threats whales face as they navigate increasingly dangerous, loud, and polluted waters. While humpbacks have bounced back since commercial whaling was banned in 1982, they’re becoming more at risk of entanglement in fishing gear and collisions with ships along their migratory routes. They’re also affected by underwater noise due to increased shipping traffic. Other whale species, including the North Atlantic right whale, swim on the edge of extinction. View all issues h