Captured after close encounters with humans, Uporny the tiger was rehabilitated and released, offering researchers an unprecedented look into the wild life of an elusive big cat. Loading Uporny's Story... Khabarovsky Province, Russia Khabarovsky Province, Russia In the Russian Far East, researchers venture into the Gursky Wildlife Refuge with a local policeman. They've come to investigate a problem with an Amur tiger. In the Russian Far East, researchers venture into the Gursky Wildlife Refuge with a local policeman. They've come to investigate a problem with an Amur tiger. For most of the past two years, they've been closely tracking the tiger through a GPS collar. Nearly a month ago, that collar stopped recording any movement, and showed a dramatic drop in the cat's body temperature. Blizzards prevented travel to the site until now. For most of the past two years, they've been closely tracking the tiger through a GPS collar. Nearly a month ago, that collar stopped recording any movement, and showed a dramatic drop in the cat's body temperature. Blizzards prevented travel to the site until now. To find the point of the last signal, they travel 5 miles from the nearest road, expecting the worst. To find the point of the last signal, they travel 5 miles from the nearest road, expecting the worst. And they're right. But this is not a story about the death of a tiger. And they're right. But this is not a story about the death of a tiger. This is a story about a wild life. November 2014 Vyazemskoye Village, Russia Several villagers spotted a lone, ragged male tiger on the outskirts of town—a rare sight, but not unheard of in the region. November 2014 Vyazemskoye Village, Russia Several villagers spotted a lone, ragged male tiger on the outskirts of town—a rare sight, but not unheard of in the region. Vyazemskoye lies at the Western edge of the Amur tiger range, where only about 540 wild tigers remain. Poaching is still the biggest threat to the Amur tiger. But habitat loss from logging and development also harms their population. Naturally elusive, tigers tend to avoid humans. But when human development cuts into the cats' habitat, and their natural prey becomes scarce, conflicts with humans increase. Any tiger that wanders into a human settlement becomes known as a "conflict tiger." After tigers killed three dogs in Vyazemskoye, locals contacted a group that addresses human-tiger conflict, created with the help of WWF-Russia. Several experts from the group came to snare and tranquilize the cat, a three-year-old male in poor health. His fur was pale, and his ribs were showing. He was seriously exhausted. Several experts from the group came to snare and tranquilize the cat, a three-year-old male in poor health. His fur was pale, and his ribs were showing. He was seriously exhausted. The tiger was brought to Utyos Rehabilitation Center in Khabarovsky Province, under the care of Pavel Fomenko, species program coordinator for WWF-Russia's Amur branch. The government-run facility specializes in nursing distressed tigers back to health for their eventual release into the wild. It's here where the tiger earned his name. When he refused to leave his transport cage and enter his new enclosure, the Utyos staff named him Uporny, which is Russian for "stubborn". But Uporny's health improved quickly, and he eagerly accepted food. Experts from Utyos made sure to keep contact with Uporny to a minimum, preserving his wild instincts for his eventual release. But Uporny's health improved quickly, and he eagerly accepted food. Experts from Utyos made sure to keep contact with Uporny to a minimum, preserving his wild instincts for his eventual release. A plan was formulated to study Uporny in the wild. He was outfitted with a radio collar, which measured body temperature and location, so his movement through the wilderness could be closely tracked. The collar could be detached remotely, or would detach automatically when it ran out of battery power. A plan was formulated to study Uporny in the wild. He was outfitted with a radio collar, which measured body temperature and location, so his movement through the wilderness could be closely tracked. The collar could be detached remotely, or would detach automatically when it ran out of battery power. Along with gathering data from the collar, researchers would track Uporny's activities through observations in the field and the use of camera traps. The goal was to learn how rehabilitated tigers move through the region, where they hunt... ...and how best to keep their population safe and away from human settlements. After 6 months at Utyos, Uporny was healthy and ready to be released back into the wild. Border of Anyuisky National Park A site for release was chosen 124 miles northeast of Utyos rehabilitation center, just outside the park in prime tiger habitat. A male tiger and a female with a cub were already known to be in the area. The cage door slid open. Healthy and energetic, Uporny bolted from the cage without looking back. The cage door slid open. Healthy and energetic, Uporny bolted from the cage without looking back. Uporny still had a long journey ahead of him. He would need to establish a home range, find prey, and survive against competitors in the forests of the Russian taiga—a harsh environment with long, cold winters. Uporny still had a long journey ahead of him. He would need to establish a home range, find prey, and survive against competitors in the forests of the Russian taiga—a harsh environment with long, cold winters. Over the next five months, the researchers waited anxiously for Uporny to settle as he steadily roamed northward in search of a home range. But the cat showed signs that he was adjusting well to his new life. Over the next five months, the researchers waited anxiously for Uporny to settle as he steadily roamed northward in search of a home range. But the cat showed signs that he was adjusting well to his new life. The clearest sign was his diet. Through field excursions, researchers noted that the cat was hunting well, regularly catching boar, red deer, and in one case, a female moose—an exceptionally large prey for a tiger. The clearest sign was his diet. Through field excursions, researchers noted that the cat was hunting well, regularly catching boar, red deer, and in one case, a female moose—an exceptionally large prey for a tiger. After months on the move, traveling over 430 miles, Uporny finally settled in the Gur Valley River. He was home. After months on the move, traveling over 430 miles, Uporny finally settled in the Gur Valley River. He was home. The following fall, researchers even discovered evidence that Uporny had found a mate—a great sign, since rehabilitated animals often show poor social skills. The following fall, researchers even discovered evidence that Uporny had found a mate—a great sign, since rehabilitated animals often show poor social skills. Because they were learning so much from Uporny's movements, the research team decided to leave his GPS collar on for another year and a half. Because they were learning so much from Uporny's movements, the research team decided to leave his GPS collar on for another year and a half. And that extension of their study led them here. Life in the taiga is unforgiving; only the strongest survive. And that extension of their study led them here. Life in the taiga is unforgiving; only the strongest survive. An autopsy is conducted to reveal what caused Uporny's death. All evidence points towards a fight with another large predator, almost certainly another male tiger. An autopsy is conducted to reveal what caused Uporny's death. All evidence points towards a fight with another large predator, almost certainly another male tiger. For WWF-Russia, Uporny became a symbol for the freedom and struggle of survival in the wild. He was captured, rehabilitated, and forced to adapt all over again. He lived freely in the forest for two years, in the harshest conditions, with temperatures dropping to -40°F and snow up to five feet deep. He successfully killed large prey, and we believe he found a mate. Uporny lived a truly wild life, and met a wild end. For WWF-Russia, Uporny became a symbol for the freedom and struggle of survival in the wild. He was captured, rehabilitated, and forced to adapt all over again. He lived freely in the forest for two years, in the harshest conditions, with temperatures dropping to -40°F and snow up to five feet deep. He successfully killed large prey, and we believe he found a mate. Uporny lived a truly wild life, and met a wild end. "He shared his life story with us," says Fomenko. "With natural causes leading to so many tiger deaths in this region, it's important to keep threats from humans to an absolute minimum." "He shared his life story with us," says Fomenko. "With natural causes leading to so many tiger deaths in this region, it's important to keep threats from humans to an absolute minimum." This intimate look into the life of an Amur tiger will help us ensure the safety of this vulnerable species... This intimate look into the life of an Amur tiger will help us ensure the safety of this vulnerable species... ...and future populations will owe their continued success in part to one stubborn tiger. ...And future populations will owe their continued success in part to one stubborn tiger. Uporny's rehabilitation was the result of collaboration between Khabarovsky Province Hunting Department's Tiger Conflict Resolution Group, the Utyos Rehabilitation Center, WWF-Russia, and the Amur Tiger Center. Since the beginning of 2017, three other tigers have been rehabilitated and released through these partners' work. Two tiger cubs have also been rescued and are currently being rehabilitated. Back to top. Back to top. View all issues h