The Rio Conchos, which provides about 90% of surface water flow in Big Bend, joins the Rio Grande near the cities of Ojinaga and Presidio, Texas. Southeast of El Paso, Texas, the Rio Grande disappears, leaving a dry riverbed to serve as the US-Mexico border between there and Presidio. Under the auspices of the 1944 US-Mexico water treaty, Mexico provides crucial water to the US, primarily from the Luis L. Léon dam and reservoir. This dam, near Truth or Consequences, New Mexico, impounds the Elephant Butte Reservoir, which is used for both recreation and agriculture. Since its completion in 1916, the dam has reduced the flow of the Rio Grande to a small, seasonal stream. About an hour southwest of the city of Chihuahua, ejido farmers here survive on rain-fed agriculture. Due in part to efforts guided by WWF, local adaptations are helping catch and keep rainwater, reduce erosion, and increase crop productivity in a hotter, drier environment. The Chihuahuan Desert is the third most biodiverse desert in the world and supports species like the Julimes pupfish. The fishes’ hot spring is part of a Ramsar wetland site, and is under the protection of a local coalition of farmers and other residents. Isidoro Márquez sports days-old stubble and wears an untucked Western shirt, blue jeans and boots. Considered to be the agricultural leader of La Noria, he has movie-star looks and wears a straw cowboy hat low on his brow. His wife, Brenda, proudly shows off their small backyard garden, which is irrigated by narrow canals. She pulls a giant squash—proof of success—from amid the plants nourished by the damp channels. The youngest of their three sons, a five-year-old, is his father's constant companion, kicking up stones on the gravel road as Márquez talks and ruffles the family dog's fur. The Rio Grande forms the southern boundary of Big Bend National Park as it meanders for 118 miles through canyons and desert. And it is here that north-south collaboration offers particular hope. The water from the Rio Conchos is released into the bigger river as a result of a 1944 treaty between the United States and Mexico. This is a necessary partnership: a functioning binational treaty governing shared water rights, and one that both nations are committed to keeping strong. Remember, this stretch of river would look drastically different without the water from the Conchos, which supplies 90% of the Rio Grande's water as it flows through the park. But with rising temperatures and more erratic weather patterns, the flow from the Conchos may be decreasing. In some years, Mexico has not always been able to deliver the agreed-upon amounts of water, or to do so within a time frame that most benefits the Rio Grande's natural water cycle. Yet despite those challenges, Mexico does honor its commitment, making up for those dry stretches later, when, for example, a tropical storm manages to make it over the mountains from the Pacific and dump a lot of rain. View all issues h