Brazil’s Atlantic Forest is one of the most biodiverse in the world, with many species found nowhere else on the planet. The forest provides for the jaguars, sloths, butterflies, birds, and thousands of other species that call it home. And these animals make a lot of noise. The variety of sounds in the Atlantic Forest is astounding. Listen closely and the dull buzz becomes the calls of frogs, insects, birds, and maybe even a capybara. But human activity threatens this forest, putting critical habitat for these animals at risk. Expanding agriculture and pastureland, timber harvesting, and urban development have shrunk Brazil’s Atlantic Forest to roughly 12% of its original size, making it one of the most endangered biomes in the world. WWF is working with local communities and organizations to restore this incredible place and the species that live there. WWF and HP are on a journey to restore, protect, and improve the management of 1 million acres of forests worldwide. Brazil’s Atlantic Forest is one of the critical forest ecosystems we are working in. With HP’s support, between 2019 and 2022, the local teams in the Atlantic Forest have planted 390,735 seedlings of 220 different species of plants to help provide much-needed habitats to the thousands of species who reside here. “When you reforest [an] area, what happens is that animals come and keep coming,” said Mauricio Nogueira, a nursery coordinator at REGUA, a local forest conservation organization in the Atlantic Forest. We are proud to work with local forest conservation partners like REGUA to ensure the Atlantic Forest and all of its sounds are around for future generations to enjoy. REGUA has restored lost wetlands which provide habitat for amphibians, birds, capybara, and caimans. Listen for frogs, birds and cicadas near one of these restored wetlands. The Atlantic Forest contains remarkable biodiversity, including over 1,000 bird species, around 200 of which are endemic. How many different bird calls can you hear? It can rain year-round in the Atlantic Forest, but the rainy season spans from October to May, which is also when most forest restoration activity happens. Hear a rainstorm in the Atlantic Forest. Some animals love the rain. Two hundred amphibian species are known to occur in Rio de Janeiro state. Here you can hear the sound of countless frogs after a rainstorm. The Atlantic Forest provides water for 60% of Brazil's population, approximately 145 million people. Restoring the Atlantic Forest ecosystem is critical for safeguarding the water supply of Brazil and the broader region. In the distance you can hear the rushing water from a stream.