More than 4 million people call Nepal’s Gandaki River Basin home. In the face of climate change, communities—high in the mountains and in the tropical lowlands downstream—are assessing their needs and taking action to make life better for themselves, their families, and the forests they depend on. Nepal’s Gandaki River Basin sets the boundaries of the Chitwan-Annapurna Landscape, where Hariyo Ban partners support many priority areas and thousands of partner communities spread across the region’s mountains, steep hills, and flat plains. Chitwan-Annapurna Landscape Boundary Elevation Regions Rivers Rapti-Narayani Kali Gandaki Seti Marshyangdi Daraundi Budhi Gandaki Trishuli Annapurna Conservation Area Chitwan National Park Chitwan-Annapurna Biodiversity Corridor Feeding goats in stalls keeps them off hillsides and out of forests, where their browsing can strip vegetation and cause erosion. By planting soil-anchoring, economically valuable cardamom plants, villagers help reforestation efforts while creating a new income opportunity. These lightweight, low-cost greenhouses help extend the growing season, enabling households to increase incomes and improve nutrition. Work with local groups helps ensure that women, the poor, and other marginalized people are involved in decisions on managing their forests, and that forest resources are equitably shared. To mitigate human-wildlife conflict, communities use solar-powered electric fencing around villages, fields, and livestock to reduce conflict and increase food security. Finding fuel for cooking and warmth is challenging in the mountains. Improved metallic cookstoves burn fuel more efficiently than regular fires, reducing pressure on forests. Foot trails often offer the only access routes to remote communities, which rely on trekking tourists for important income. Post-earthquake, cash-for-work payments for trail reconstruction generated much-needed funds to help people restart their livelihoods. Buddhist prayer flags are strung in high places; their mantras are believed to spread compassion and goodwill. By promoting metal poles instead of wooden ones (which must be replaced every few years) Hariyo Ban helps take pressure off forests. Nepalese homestays allow tourists to enjoy wildlife viewing and local food, and to learn about traditional ways of life while providing host families a vital source of income—particularly near protected areas. User groups plant trees and other native plants, and protect areas from grazing livestock, so natural forest regeneration can occur. Antipoaching units patrol forests to detect illegal activity. In many communities, WWF supports the construction of fishponds that provide a critical source of sustenance and income, and also help reduce pressure on freshwater biodiversity along Nepal’s rivers and near Chitwan National Park. Clearing steep river-valley slopes for agriculture by felling and burning has caused soil erosion and landslides, but planting broom grass helps stabilize hillsides. The flower heads are used to make brooms, which are sold for income. Many fish and bird species migrate along north-south corridors, following river valleys that cut through hill and mountain ranges. These corridors may become increasingly important as the climate changes, and restoring them will allow native species to seek cooler, damper habitat. Earthquakes, extreme climate change-driven storms, and resulting runoff can destabilize slopes, triggering landslides that impact communities, infrastructure, and forest cover. Hariyo Ban helps at-risk villages stabilize slopes and prepare for natural disasters. View all issues h