Recently, some bizarre crustaceans have made a big splash in the scientific world. They're blind. They live in extreme deep-sea environments. They've all been discovered since 2005. And they're so hairy that they've quickly become known as "yeti crabs," after the mythical snow monster of the Himalayas. Check out three particularly cool yeti crab species, all in the newly christened genus kiwaidae. Kiwa hirsuta Kiwa hirsuta Discovered: 2005
 Location: Pacific-Antartic ridge (south of Easter Island)
 Ocean depth: 7,200 feet
 Habitat: Hydrothermal vents where mineral-rich water heated by lava enters the ocean
 Size: Specimen collected was 6 inches
 Unique features: The hairs on Kiwa hirsuta's arms are actually soft spines called setae; all three species grow dense "gardens" of bacteria on those hairs. Scientists have hypothesized that the crabs cultivate and eat the bacteria. Discovered: Location: Ocean depth: Habitat: Size: Unique features: Kiwa puravida Kiwa puravida Discovered: 2006
 Location: Off the coast of Costa Rica
 Ocean depth: 3,281 - 3,412 feet
 Habitat: Cold seep (place on ocean floor that leaks hydrocarbon-rich fluid)
 Size: 3.5 inches
 Unique features: Kiwa puravida possesses an appendage that looks like a tiny comb; scientists have observed it using the comb like a weird built-in fork, to scrape bacteria from its hairs and eat them. Discovered: Location: Ocean depth: Habitat: Size: Unique features: Kiwa tyleri, the "Hoff crab" Kiwa tyleri, the "Hoff crab" Discovered: 2010
 Location: Around east Scotia ridge, off the coast of Antartica
 Ocean depth: More than 8,500 feet
 Habitat: Small zone between surreally hot hydrothermal vents and frigid Antartic waters
 Size: 0.19 inches - 5.9 inches
 Unique features: Named after actor David Hasselhoff due to its hairy chest and appendages, the Hoff crab is more compact than Kiwa hirsta or Kiwa puravida. Discovered: Location: Ocean depth: Habitat: Size: Unique features: Illustrations by © Kel Zuki / WWF-US Illustrations by View all issues h