In one of the most climate-vulnerable countries on Earth, an unprecedented development project is building a model for adapting to climate change on a massive scale—by working with one village at a time. As he picks his way through the thick under-brush and flat, leafy fronds of cardamom in the Bhakarjung Community Forest, Basanta Raj Poudel gestures toward the brown terraced fields unfolding below. “Ten to 15 years ago, when we walked through here, this whole area was covered in mist,” Poudel says. “It used to snow here, too, but that stopped a decade ago.” He pauses to peer at the fields below. Some are studded with green, but it becomes clear that the green is just stunted weeds growing on soil so dry that it is split by a thousand cracks. Poudel’s village, Dhikurpokhari, sits just below Nepal’s High Mountains within the Seti sub-river basin—one of seven in the sprawling Gandaki river basin. To the south lies India. To the north, the Himalayas, which include some of the tallest peaks in the world. The massive Kali Gandaki gorge—said to be the world’s deepest—cuts through the high mountain range, dividing the eastern and western Himalayas. From up in those looming mountains, snow and glacier melt flows downstream, mixing with rainwater and connecting with underground water sources to reach thousands of springs, streams, and rivers—the source of water for millions of people, animals, and plants. Yet in Poudel’s village, at what should be the start of the rainy season, the fields are dry. Dhikurpokhari is not alone in its predicament. Climate change has hit Nepal hard, and it has hit fast. It is causing greater variations in weather patterns and more extreme weather events, like the drought that contributed to the exceptional number of wildfires that raged across Nepal during 2016’s pre-monsoon season. But the fires are just one small piece of the shifting climate-change picture. The rains, too, have become less predictable, making it more difficult to decide which crops to grow and when to plant them. More hailstorms and stronger snows in some areas are affecting agriculture as well. “Nepal is a mountainous country with low incomes and diverse landscapes,” says the Director General of the Department of Forests in the Ministry of Forests and Soil Conservation, Krishna P. Acharya. “It is one of the most climate-vulnerable countries in the world.” Funded by USAID and implemented by WWF, CARE, the Federation of Community Forestry Users Nepal, and Nepal’s National Trust for Nature Conservation, Hariyo Ban is an ambitious and expansive partnership designed to reduce the adverse impacts of climate change and threats to biodiversity. It is also a testing ground—of new ideas, deeply embedded community leadership, and the power of marrying landscape-level conservation with a granular, village-by-village approach. Since 2011, the project has focused its work in Nepal’s Chitwan-Annapurna Landscape and Terai Arc Landscape, identifying key climate adaptation and resilience needs, contributing to climate-mitigation efforts, and delivering unprecedented levels of integrated support for the region’s people and wildlife. *All results represent work across both the Chitwan-Annapurna Landscape and the Terai Arc Landscape, and were accurate as of this issue’s press date. “Now they know how their actions directly affect this lake,” he adds. “They know not only about the impact on this lake but that conservation of the forest also helps them. Many water sources are drying up because of deforestation and landslides. Now people in this area know about this issue and other principles of conservation.” Guma Poudel, who took part in Hariyo Ban’s education initiatives for women and girls, and who now volunteers as a member of Bhakarjung’s Community Forest User Group (CFUG) and nine-person Community-Based Anti-poaching Unit (CBAPU), agrees. Further downstream in foothills far south of the Himalayan peaks, the Kerunge River in Nepal’s southern Nawalparasi district is in bad shape. As far as the eye can see downstream, the riverbed is covered in gravel and silt. Motorbikes bounce and jostle over the makeshift roadway; locals pick their way across the dusty expanse to cross from one side to the other. People here say that just 15 or so feet under the riverbed the water still flows, but decades of landslides and soil erosion upstream have completely concealed the river in the dry season. “The water used to be waist high,” says Saraswati Gurung, whose tidy home sits near the sandy bank. Her neighbor, Meena Gurung, is chairperson of the local, women-led Community Forest User Group, and has played a major role in spearheading economic and environmental programs in the village. Walking across the gravelly riverbed, she explains how upstream behavior hurt their livelihoods downstream. “Before, we had agricultural lands on both sides of the river, but a flood destroyed everything. That flood was caused by people clearing the forests upstream. There was a big river in the middle here, but the landslide filled it all.” Over the past two years, 29,000 people have stayed overnight in Baghkhor, where a homestay costs $6 a night. Its location on the edge of Chitwan National Park has made the village an ideal, economical base for local and foreign tourists who have flocked to the area to see one-horned rhino, wild boar, peacock, and deer in a landscape that also shelters elephants and tigers. Rhino protection efforts in particular have been so successful that a visitor is almost guaranteed a sighting on a standard tour of the park or community forest. View all issues h