Nelson Barragán is barefoot, burly, and bronzed. He walks into the open-air dining area of his riverside lodge as his new guests are taking the final bites of dessert. They arrived a few hours earlier, and he is here to welcome them.

He turns on an LCD projector at the head of the dining table. A photo of an owl appears on the screen behind him. Then a caiman. A capybara and an anaconda (the largest rodent and the largest boa in the world, respectively). A puma, a jaguar, a heron, a wild pig. Dozens of other wildlife photos follow.

Barragán (pictured, with his brother Julio) has seen all these creatures on the 42,000 acres his family owns in the Orinoco River basin of eastern Colombia, which his guests have come to explore. He and his seven siblings grew up here, on a savanna where two family businesses—cattle ranching and tourism—coexist with nature.

Next Barragán strums a few tunes inspired by the sounds of this place: cattle running across dry earth and rain pounding on the roof during a fierce summer storm; birds singing at sunrise and wind rustling the leaves in the trees.

Then he rests a small guitar, a cuatro, on his hip and begins to sing songs he has written. In one, a man is taken to court by a stork, who charges him with killing wildlife and doing harm to the planet. The man’s attorney, a dog, explains that the wildlife was a threat to the man, who, without claws, couldn’t defend himself against attack. But the judge, an owl, doesn’t buy it; the man, he says, has a brain and should know how to use it better. The owl rules that the man is guilty.

Barragán ends the night by showing the guests a few of his paintings, including one that depicts the courtroom scene from the song.

To the guests, he has put on a show. But to him, it’s simply his truth. Barragán is a llanero—a cowboy from this region of Colombia. Music, art, and stories about nature are at the heart of his culture. A harp is just as familiar to a llanero as a lasso or a cattle brand.

“To be a llanero, you have to know how to ride horses and raise livestock,” the 53-year-old says in his soft, calm voice. “But you also need to have respect for the land and the wild species that live on it...and you need to use music and stories to share the culture so it lives on.” A NATURAL MOSAIC
From top: ducks in flight; an iguana; a hawk in the llanos, or savanna; coral in Tayrona National Park; a spectacled caiman; capybaras. A NATURAL MOSAIC Heritage Colombia differs from other PFP initiatives in two important ways. The first is the inclusion of land adjacent to—not just within—protected areas. By focusing on multiple types of land (including national and regional protected areas, Afro-Colombian and indigenous territories, and forest reserves), Heritage Colombia recognizes that natural resources, as well as the clean water and other services they provide, do not stop at the borders of protected areas. They are part of a larger landscape that needs to be managed as one.

The second is the emphasis on governance—specifically, rules and policies related to who owns the land and how the land can be used. Governance is not always clear in Colombia, yet it is an important issue to address because many communities in the country rely on the land inside and adjacent to protected areas for their sustenance. Without clarity on governance, not only do tensions arise, but better land management is nearly impossible. And without better land management, the long-term health of protected areas is in jeopardy.

Utria National Park, on the Pacific Coast, provides an example of the benefits of both good governance and looking beyond the park boundaries. Utria lies at the end of an hour-long boat ride that is at the end of a 30-minute bumpy drive that is at the end of a two-hour flight from Bogotá.

At more than 150,000 acres, Utria’s landscapes and seascapes range from coral reefs to mangroves to rain forests. And the variety of the park’s ecosystems is matched by the complexity of governing who lives in, owns, manages, and uses the land.

Three groups of indigenous people live in the park. Three Afro-Colombian communities live just outside the park. The indigenous people and Afro-Colombians have the right to use land and water within the park, as long as they do so in accordance with the guidelines they developed with the parks agency and others—and they have this right even if they do not own the land. In Utria, the indigenous communities own land within the park (they were there long before the park was created in the 1980s) but the Afro-Colombians do not.

Yet despite this level of complexity, Utria is one of the best-managed protected areas in Colombia. That’s because the communities and park agency have worked together—and with other entities, such as WWF and USAID—to develop and implement a strategy that clearly outlines who owns what and how natural resources can be used. Gregorio Urrutia Cáceres benefits from that clarity. He and others in his predominantly Afro-Colombian community, which lies just outside the park boundaries, have the right to use the park. He knows exactly which land and waterways he can use. He also knows what practices he must follow—like respecting no-go fishing zones—to ensure his fishing business doesn’t harm Utria’s coral reefs or damage mangroves that the parks agency has been working to restore. And he knows that protecting the park also protects his livelihood.

Cáceres has fished almost every day since his father taught him how some 40 years ago, catching albacore, pompano, and black tuna, which he sells and uses to feed his family. For the most part, he says he has always followed good fishing practices. But with the help of the parks agency, WWF, and others, he now uses fishing lines instead of large nets with small holes, which have the unintended consequence of trapping other fish as bycatch.

Cáceres has also developed a small tourism business—mainly offering whale watching trips—in accordance with the mutually agreed-upon guidelines about resource use. Humpbacks travel through this area in the summer, and the number of tourists coming to this remote part of Colombia to see them increased as word got out that Utria was safe, relative to other areas of the country, during the conflict years.

“I am so grateful to the park for helping us,” says Cáceres. “Because of their help, we know what we can do and where we can do it. We are now on the right track.”

“Managing parks in Colombia can be hard, given all the people who have rights to the land,” says Utria park manager Henry Pinzoón Benavides. “But there are so many benefits to working with them because they are such good stewards of the land. They need to be just as much a part of the parks as the park rangers need to be part of the community.”

Benavides hopes Utria is the poster child for good governance, especially as Heritage Colombia takes shape.

“I am excited about Heritage Colombia because it is a good way to show how important it is to work together,” he says. “We can show that this model works and, therefore, that it should be scaled up.” View all issues h