A community in Alaska's Bristol Bay adapts to a changing climate My first view of Port Heiden, Alaska, is from a thousand feet above. It’s a grey, wet day, but that doesn’t mute the bright green and brilliant blue below. We fly in to the village over hundreds of lakes, ponds, and free-flowing rivers and streams. All of this freshwater feeds Bristol Bay, the eastern arm of the Bering Sea, and its adjacent lush landscape. No roads lead to Port Heiden, and there’s no safe harbor to dock a boat in. The only way for an outsider like me to reach this remote community on the Alaska Peninsula is to fly. A well-worn red and white single-engine plane that would struggle to seat more than a dozen people has just shuttled us 140 miles, from King Salmon. We land on a gravel airstrip built during World War II by the United States Army, which stopped using it by the 1970s. I’m here with colleague Dave Aplin, director of education and outreach for WWF’s Arctic Field Program, to learn how communities in Alaska are adapting to climate change—and how WWF’s work in the region can better support such efforts. Port Heiden lies in the shadow of Aniakchak volcano, a national monument that draws hardcore hikers from around the world. The vista, framed by tall tundra grass and fireweed, greets us each morning outside the duplex we’ve rented, which is the only way to stay longer than a stopover in a town with no hotel. On our second morning I spot something darting across the horizon between our front door and the bay. After searching through a pair of borrowed binoculars, I discover that we’re having breakfast with a brown bear. The animal, in the midst of its summer feasting, chases after what appear to be half a dozen cranes. In south central Alaska, brown bears are an iconic species, and guided wildlife tours promising hope of a glimpse generate big bucks; conservative estimates put the revenue at $34 million a year. The brown bear’s morning run is an unforgettable glimpse of Bristol Bay’s natural wonder, but it may also be a sign of a warming world. “The animals act different,” Kosbruk says. “The bears are coming over here. They’re hungry, they’re acting different, they’re more aggressive.” The changes go beyond bears. According to residents, after the Exxon Valdez oil spill in 1989, for example, Port Heiden began getting sea otters for the first time—lots of them. Around the time they arrived, the ice covering Bristol Bay began retreating. While there’s no hard scientific data to confirm it, locals report that the otters liked the warming environment, so they stayed and multiplied, eating most of the clams in the process. A recent survey claims there are now 6,000 to 8,000 otters. “We used to have a lot of clams,” says Kosbruk, “but the sea otters took the clams.” And the otters aren’t the only ones reshaping the local food chain. The community still hunts, fishes, and picks berries, but it’s not enough. Take salmon, for instance. While commercial salmon fishing in Bristol Bay remains strong, subsistence fishing in the rivers that feed into the bay is getting harder as warmer waters make it more difficult for the fish to survive. “There’s years that we haven’t gotten fish, and that is very traumatic,” says Kosbruk. “I think it affects us socially, you know, because when we are doing those things, there’s a lot of family interactions and lots of storytelling and carrying on and laughing.” The erosion taking place along Port Heiden’s shoreline is closely monitored by community members and scientists. Over the years, the data collected have been used to estimate future erosion. But it turns out those estimates were off by an order of decades. As of December 2019, parts of the shoreline had pushed past projections for 2035 and beyond, and wave action continues to further erode the coast. The most notable impact is on Goldfish Lake, which has now largely emptied into Bristol Bay. MAP DATA COURTESY OF DGGS STAFF, 2015, ALASKA SHORELINE CHANGE TOOL: ALASKA DIVISION OF GEOLOGICAL & GEOPHYSICAL SURVEYS DIGITAL DATA SERIES 9, HTTP://DOI.ORG/10.14509/SHORELINE. HTTP://DOI.ORG/10.14509/29504 As Port Heiden adapts, it is anticipating and planning for what comes next. “The community has a very clear vision for where they want to be in the future,” says Erica Lujan, of the Alaska Native Tribal Health Consortium. Lujan coordinated a vulnerability assessment for Port Heiden, to identify how climate change will impact the environment and traditional ways of life. She then worked with the village to integrate adaptation strategies into existing community goals, which produced plans to address inevitabilities like changes in wildlife and a coastline that continues to erode. Scott Anderson, Port Heiden’s environmental director, spends his day finding ways to bring those plans to life. “We’re willing to grow with climate change,” he says, “and however it affects us, we want to be able to survive and, you know, survive well.” Anderson says he’s always searching for grants and government funds to bring opportunity to Port Heiden. “This is money to put people to work,” he says. “We’ve been cleaning up the environment and people want to help me.” The village recycled two oil tanks, turning one into an airplane hangar and the other into a recycling center, where Anderson is trying to make heating fuel that’s cheaper and more sustainable by creating wood pellets. “When plans are made locally, people are better able to identify and speak to the importance of the relationships with the landscapes; they can design plans that maintain those relationships,” says Lujan. “And that’s a key component of resilience.” Our week in Port Heiden ends where it began, on the airstrip. It’s a cool, wet, foggy day, the kind of day that could dampen plans to fly out. But the local airport contact—who also runs the village clinic—tells us that the plane will come, and here you learn to trust the locals. As we load up to take off, I mull over something Adrianne Christensen said. “We’ve been managing these animals, this land, for thousands, tens of thousands of years,” she told me. “This is our place. And our culture is really tied to this land, to our food, and so that’s gonna be really hard to hold on to. And we’re doing everything we can to keep that alive.” The people who live in Port Heiden know it best and are also best placed to protect their environment and conserve wildlife populations. There is more change coming, and the community is planning to keep up. In fact, adaptation to climate change could create some opportunities. As a small sliver of land washes away between Bristol Bay and the freshwater Goldfish Lake, it could help diversify Port Heiden’s economy. The village might get a safe harbor, which could also benefit the local fish processing center. If all goes according to plan, Port Heiden could one day be a hub on the Alaska Peninsula. While the community has a handle on its home and needs, it’s clear that outsiders like me have a role to play too. Sharing their stories of survival can motivate change in the cities, where decisions are made, and there are never enough people advocating for the needs of Native coastal communities. There is value in sharing experiences and resources, too. A few weeks after I say goodbye to Port Heiden, an email from Aplin makes its way to my inbox. “FYI,” it reads, “Lillionna just wrapped up a week with us in Homer, visiting farms and meeting our local food experts. It was terrific.” View all issues h