The Talty family dog keeps a close eye on the day’s coastal seaweed harvesting efforts on Spanish Point near Quilty, County Clare. Three generations of Taltys have gathered seaweed in the traditional way. On the stormy Atlantic coast of the Burren in County Clare, Gerard Talty has technologized the ancient bounty of the sea, drying and selling kelp, wrack and other types of seaweed as food supplements that sell worldwide. Looking out at the powerful rolling Atlantic from the rocky peninsula at Quilty, it’s easy to see how a hurricane on this coastline wrecked the invading Spanish Armada in 1588. Tourism and farming in Ireland have rarely worked in harmony, but on the Burren, managing nature sustainably has benefited both farmers and visitors. The region has become a model for producing food within a delicate ecosystem where rare wild plants spring from cracks in the limestone, yielding a stark beauty that draws millions of tourists each year. Shaped by wind and water erosion, the “karst” landscape forms dramatic “clints” and “grikes”—channels and crevices that reveal glimpses of deep water reserves beneath the rock. The stepped limestone platform falls raggedly down to the untamed coast, part of the Wild Atlantic Way tourism route. A few miles north of Quilty, the road leaves the coast and climbs eastward into the uplands of the Burren. Here the land is fashioned by the elements but also by 6,000 years of farming. Low walls painstakingly constructed from small pebbles and stones remain to denote separate holdings, even if some “fields” are fairly small. It’s a harsh place to earn a living but, in a return to the past, cattle are once again being wintered out on the limestone in a system that supports the regeneration of rare flora. The cattle clear growth on the uplands, removing grass, opening crevices to light and leaving behind nourishment (in the form of natural waste) to fertilize the growth of rare orchid species in the late spring and early summer. About 160 farmers now take part in the Burren Farming for Conservation Programme, which has managed to attract EU support in addition to funding from the Irish state. Meanwhile, a separate organization called the Burren Beo Trust is linking conservation and tourism to maintain and restore the area’s biodiversity. Farmer Pat Nagle keeps 15 cows and a bull on the uplands on the slopes of Sliabh Carran, which locals call “the mountain of the stone mound.” In the reverse of housing animals in barns during winter, Nagle has his cows climb 600 feet every October, grazing the unique grasses and plants amid the limestone grikes. In February they come back down to calve out on the lowlands. Nagle also has 12 field monuments on his farm, in Pullagh, County Clare. Some are so old that they stand as evidence of Bronze Age communities living and farming on his land. “We cleared some hazel last year and there, hidden away, was an ancient stone hut. Maybe it’s a place of shelter where people like me, farmers, watched their cattle on the mountain.” Nagle’s farm is slated to be audited by Bord Bia for carbon emissions and environmental impact. With no bedding or energy costs, his operation couldn’t be more sustainable. “I’ve 80 acres on the mountain but only 15 cows on it in winter. In fact we don’t even talk about acres here but what your land can carry. It’s the lowest management you could have, but it’s also what we were reared at.” Even with the GPS technology and benchmarking, Bord Bia is in many ways simply documenting and supporting what Ireland’s farmers, and the farmers before them, were already doing to live in harmony with their land. Thanks to its fertile land and abundant rainfall, Ireland is better positioned than most countries to improve the sustainability of its agriculture, including the grass-fed, small-farm approach to dairy described here. But there are other approaches to minimizing food’s impact on the planet, and from Pakistan to Pennsylvania, governments, businesses, farmers, fishers and consumers are showing how we can all do something to make our food more sustainable. WWF recognizes that not everyone has the ability or inclination to change their consumption habits. This is why we’re working to shift the entire food industry to be more sustainable—from the production of dairy, meat and row crops to the way food is processed, packaged and delivered to eaters everywhere. In short, the practices used to grow, catch and deliver our food vary widely from one region to another. WWF tailors its approach depending on the food product and region to achieve the greatest global impact possible. So regardless of what you choose to eat, the best approach to addressing your own impact is to understand the impacts of the food you consume and buy accordingly. David McLaughlin


Acting Senior Vice President


of Sustainable Food, WWF David McLaughlin thousands of small dairy farmers use systems that convert cow manure into fertilizer and fuel that they and their neighbors use for cooking and to power their homes. Larger systems are also being employed on a growing number of farms around the world, including in the US, to reuse not only manure but also organic waste from industrial manufacturers in nearby communities. SABMiller’s sugarcane subsidiary, Azucarera del Norte, achieved Bonsucro certification, which requires compliance around key sustainability measurements. This is the first sugarcane operator in Central America to achieve this certification, showing that sustainable performance can be achieved in the developing world. farms producing about 90% of the country’s shrimp earned certification from the Aquaculture Stewardship Council. This international body creates standards for responsible seafood production to preserve wildlife and water quality, promote animal health and uphold human rights. Belize now leads the world; no other country produces a higher proportion of ASC-certified shrimp. including Mars, Nestlé, Procter & Gamble and Mondelez, buy a significant portion of their palm oil from sources certified by the Roundtable for Sustainable Palm Oil. In the past year, some major palm oil producers and traders have made pledges regarding deforestation. Cargill, for example, broadened its commitment to include every commodity it produces and trades. While much still needs to be done, it is clear that awareness of these issues is growing rapidly. have established the world’s largest sustainable tuna fishery, as certified by the Marine Stewardship Council, which ensures fish stocks are managed responsibly with minimal impact on other marine life. The fishery produces about 10% of the world’s tuna, valued at about $1.3 billion each year and enough to fill nearly one billion 5-ounce cans, the average size in the
United States. View all issues h