The natural world is under threat. In the Amazon, more than 150 acres of rainforest are lost every minute of every day. Populations of mammals, birds, fish, amphibians, and reptiles have seen an alarming average drop of 68% since 1970. And this isn't just about the natural world - it's about our world as well. We depend on nature for our own survival, livelihoods, happiness, and as seen with COVID-19, our health - the destruction of nature only increases the chances of future pandemics emerging. Our broken relationship with nature is putting the future of people and the planet at risk. The natural world is under threat. But humanity is waking up...and stepping up. But humanity is waking up...and stepping up. A growing number of people around the world are concerned about humanity’s relationship with nature, changing their ways, and demanding more action to protect the planet. A new WWF-commissioned report by the Economist Intelligence Unit shows we are entering a new era of change. The report, spanning 54 countries that hold 80% of the world's population, shows that people are changing the way they think about sustainability and that business and governments have an unprecedented opportunity to lead. In the fashion industry, 60% of brands in North America and Europe say that ‘implementing sustainability measures’ was one of their top priorities in 2020. Last year, 540 of the world’s biggest corporations - including Fortune 500 companies such as Microsoft, Unilever, and Citigroup - signed up to a Business for Nature statement calling on governments worldwide to do more to reverse nature loss. MILLIONS ARE DEMANDING URGENT CHANGE MILLIONS ARE DEMANDING URGENT CHANGE Since 2016, over 159 million signatures for biodiversity-related campaigns have been collected over 159 million signatures for biodiversity-related campaigns ....AND THEIR VOICES ARE BEING HEARD ....AND THEIR VOICES ARE BEING HEARD Last September, global leaders participating in the United Nations Summit on Biodiversity, representing 84 countries, committed to reversing biodiversity loss by 2030. As of 2019, legislations restricting single use plastic items have been passed in 127 countries, following sustained global protest about the environmental harm that was being caused. USE YOUR VOICE USE YOUR VOICE Loss of nature is increasing our vulnerability to pandemics, undermining efforts to tackle the climate crisis, and threatening livelihoods. Leaders are scheduled to make critical decisions later this year on climate and the environment. Together, they represent a momentous opportunity to reverse biodiversity loss and secure a future for humans and nature.