Ushering in a more sustainable future Ushering in a more sustainable future WWF’s Erin Simon has been working for the past two years to make this future possible. As the manager of WWF’s packaging and material science program, Erin leads our efforts to protect natural resources by working with business and industry to help them become part of the solution. This includes making informed, sustainable material choices for their products and packaging. Companies must better understand both the impacts and the advantages of different raw materials offer and make decisions that add value to their products while reducing the impact on the environment. WWF will work with these companies to guide the responsible selection and harvesting of feedstocks—such as sugar cane, corn, bulrush, and switchgrass—used to make plastics from agricultural materials. As the development of these renewable materials has grown, so has the opportunity to address their potential impacts on land use, food security, and biodiversity. Driving positive change at scale Driving positive change at scale To guide the development of sustainable bioplastics, the alliance will bring together experts from industry, academia and civil society to develop and support informed science, collaboration, education, and innovation. By involving companies from across the food, beverage, automotive and apparel industries, this collaborative effort seeks to drive positive change and provide a competitive alternative to fossil-fuel based plastics. “Fossil fuel based plastics have been produced for almost five decades. They’ve had all that time to become really efficient and really cost-effective,” said Simon. “Changing the raw building blocks of chemistry to make a new plastic from renewable materials requires new technology and infrastructure, and to be able to compete with the existing industry, you have a lot of time to make up.” With the support and purchasing power of multiple brands and consumer products, the time, resources and costs of pursuing sustainable solutions for plant-based plastics can be great reduced. “We are trying to do what was done in fifty years for fossil-fuel based technology in about five to ten years. I am confident that pursuing a pre-competitive approach, which is grounded in science and focused on stewardship, will accelerate a future that is good for business and for the planet.” Learn more about WWF's efforts to transform business. Learn more about WWF's efforts to transform business.