WWF is only one voice among many We are the Arctic. We are as much a part of the Arctic as the polar bears, the whales, the seals, the waterfowl, the fish, the tundra, the darkness and the daylight. That’s the real reason why our communities need to have a larger voice. Edward Itta

Iñupiat whaler and member of the US Arctic Research Commission, on the need for the Iñupiat to have a bigger role in decisions made about the Arctic Edward Itta >980,
 000 people have joined WWF’s online activist community to help make a difference for endangered species, the habitats they live in, and the communities that depend on them At first I thought I was fighting to save rubber trees, then I thought I was fighting to save the Amazon rain forest. Now I realise I am fighting for humanity. Chico Mendes

Brazilian environmentalist and human rights advocate, in a 1988 speech. December 2013 marked the 25th anniversary of his assassination by a landowner who opposed his conservation efforts. From The Guardian, December 20, 2013 Chico Mendes WWF supporters have made the commitment to incorporate renewable energy choices in their lives This is a way to say to people we are not putting a value on ivory. We’re putting a value on the lives of the elephants. Azzedine Downes

President of the International Fund for Animal Welfare, on the US government’s public destruction of 6 tons of confiscated ivory near Denver in November 2013. From CBS Denver, November 13, 2013 Azzedine Downes The continuing disgrace of hunger in the world moves me to share with you the question: How are we using the Earth’s resources? … It is well known that present production is sufficient, and yet millions of persons continue to suffer and die from hunger, and this is a real scandal. Pope Francis

Pope of the Catholic Church, addressing the global hunger crisis in his message for the 2014 World Day of Peace Pope Francis We can take drastic action now to ensure we prevent a future where super typhoons become a way of life…. By failing to meet the objectives of the [COP19] convention we may have ratified our own doom. Naderev Saño 

Philippines delegate to the 2013 Warsaw Climate Change Conference, or COP19, on Typhoon Haiyan’s devastation to his country and the need for climate change progress. From pv magazine, November 12, 2013 Naderev Saño people called on Congress to protect America’s Northern Great Plains In India, we’re not looking at tigers as just another species to protect. Nearly 300 rivers that are crucial for agriculture depend on tiger forests. So in that sense, the tiger holds the key to my country’s food security. Samir Sinha

Director of India’s Corbett Tiger Reserve and 2013-2014 Fulbright Fellow, on the significance of tiger conservation to human well-being Samir Sinha Join WWF's Conservation Action Network. Join WWF's Conservation Action Network. View all issues h