On Saturday, April 29, 2017 hundreds of thousands of people across the country will stand up to show they support action on climate change at the People’s Climate March. Our planet’s future depends on the decisions we make today. It’s up to all of us to come together and invest in a clean energy and keep the planet safe and healthy for generations to come. We reached out to some of our supporters and Panda Ambassadors who participated in the People’s Climate March about why they think it’s important to tackle one of the biggest threats to our planet and become part of a new generation of American climate leadership. “People won’t change their behavior or take action unless they acknowledge that climate change is real, and understand the direct impact it has on them and their families. My hope is that the media, celebrities, and political figures educate and share the scientific facts about climate change and create the urgency needed amongst communities to actually address the desperate state of the environment.” “It is important for me to participate in the march to bring awareness to a very serious issue that affects our planet. I believe using our voices and bodies as ambassadors will help educate others on ways to protect our planet now and for the future. My hope is for unity and balance among the environment and every living creature. There are so many issues and topics that divide us as a nation, but caring for the health of our planet provides survival in the present and for future generations.” “Each individual person can make some type of difference to limit their own carbon footprint. If we all took five minutes out of day to calculate what our current footprint is and think about ways to reduce waste, we can each create a positive impact on the environment. I have taught my friends and coworkers that if they can switch from plastic water bottles to a reusable water bottle, they will not only save money but reduce plastic waste. If we take the time to learn about our own carbon footprint and then teach our friends, family and coworkers about the how much one small lifestyle change can make a world of difference, we can create a better future for our planet.” “My hope is that people realize how fortunate we are to live in this perfectly balanced globe keeping us alive. We are not here by coincidence. The environment has shaped us and nurtured us. Therefore, nature deserves to be respected and protected if we wish to continue to dwell upon this earth. While we can't reverse time, I hope that we can use our technological advancements to help us restore our climate and continue to find innovative ways to make it simpler for every household to mitigate their waste. I hope that we become more conscious in order to make better choices in how we consume and that each of us understands the impact we can make with our choices and the examples we leave for our youth.” “Climate change represents one of, if not the, largest challenge that humanity will face to date. Because of the slow and somewhat unpredictable nature of climate change, it becomes easy for some to dismiss the scientific evidence and think that climate change is not as dangerous as it truly is. To preserve the Earth and its resources for future generations of humans, we need to take action and we need to take it now! I believe that fighting climate change should be a unifier, a global initiative to change our lifestyles and policies in order to live more sustainable lives.” “In the face of climate change and in the hope of creating a better future, people can be as informed and engaged as possible, utilizing their strengths and talents in various ways. This can take the form of having conversations with others about living more sustainable lifestyles, creating less trash, recycling and reusing more, reaching out to legislators about policies they support like those that support the renewable energy sector and protecting wildlife and conservation of natural resources. People can also organize and network better than ever via social media and keep each other aware of campaigns and mobilization efforts. It is very important to focus on what we can do at the State and local levels, especially now when many environmental policies at the federal level are discouraging.”