“Politics we shall always have with us: but if wild life is destroyed, it is gone for ever, and if it is seriously reduced, its restoration will be a lengthy and expensive business.” WWF, along with many colleague and partner institutions, is focusing on 2020 as a “super year” for nature. In 2020 And so to make the most of 2020, when these events will turn the world’s attention to nature, WWF and partners are calling for a New Deal for People and Nature to bend the curve of biodiversity and nature loss. We envision this effort as an integrated approach to putting biodiversity loss and nature restoration at the top of the global agenda, much as the Paris Agreement did for climate change. Creating a New Deal for People and Nature will require us to use the best possible science to develop an apex target to halt biodiversity loss and drive restoration. It will require us to be brilliant in engaging the governments involved in negotiating the various global conventions and agreements. It will require us to work with leaders in the private sector to make clear the financial imperative to keep intact the planet that is not only our home but also the source of the natural resources that fuel our economies. And finally, it will require us to be excellent at communicating the genius and beauty of nature, the degree to which we depend on it, the fact that we are losing more of it every day, and the solutions that we can and must marshal to reverse the tide of destruction. I encourage you to read the pages of this magazine and imagine with us what’s next for nature. What needs to be invented? How can we change the behavior of people, governments, and businesses so that we all make smarter use of our natural resources? Huxley concluded his series by stating simply, of the wildlife and wild lands he had seen: “They must at all costs be preserved.” This is what WWF was born to do. It is in our DNA to save nature, and our work makes all the difference in the world. President and CEO View all issues h