In September 2020, in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic, WWF worked with Indigenous leaders and photographer
Jason Houston to gather stories from Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota. Here, four members of the Oglala Lakota
Nation share, through their own words and images, stories from their lives. I am of the grass, plants, and trees, the root nation that sways in the winds of the prairie of the Northern Great Plains, storing carbon and returning oxygen to the world above. I am of the soil, that holds the very footprints and knowledge of my ancestors and provides life and vision for me. I am Oglala Lakota, Indigenous to this land, to this space, and I want to share with you the story of this place. The majority of the South Unit is in my district on Pine Ridge Reservation. A lot of tribal members drive by and through it daily to go into the city. Makosica is what it’s called—Badlands. A lot of this area is culturally and historically significant due to the relationship we have with the land as local Indigenous people. Everybody has a piece of history connected to this area, and it gets passed down generationally in our storytelling. I’m always just looking for beautiful things. When I was younger, I was everywhere. I’ve hiked every bit of this land, all back up in those hills. If I’m not hunting, then I’m hunting rocks. Because we grew up here and we’ve always lived out here, it baffles me why so many people pay money to come and see it. As you get older, you realize that it is ruggedly beautiful and it’s unique. It’s our backyard, but it’s beautiful. We need to protect it. We need to protect it for our kids, our grandkids. I’m not the best historian—there are people amongst our tribe who are better—but I do my best with what I know anyway. The youth are the future of our nation. We try to teach them things that our ancestors would teach. These are five buffalo skulls that we use at our Sundance [Editor’s note: Sundance is a traditional Lakota summer ceremony that the US government had outlawed until the 1970s]. Sundance is very important to us: We didn’t do it this year because of the pandemic, but I pulled them out as a reflection of prayer, of a year away from our normal ways. Jason Houston I’ve always wanted to be a photographer, but not just because I want to make photographs. For me, photography is a tool to affect change, and over my 20+ year career the ways I’ve learned to use that tool has continued to evolve. Working with the communities on the Pine Ridge and Rosebud Indian Reservations in South Dakota on our recent participatory photography project is an example of how much it has changed and why embracing these new approaches is so important. View all issues h