In January 2018, WWF president and CEO Carter Roberts sat down with DR. E. O. WILSON, Pulitzer Prize-winning author, Harvard University Entomology Faculty Emeritus, and the world’s leading expert on ants. Dr. Wilson also served on WWF’s Board of Directors and National Council. They talked about his Southern boyhood, his love of writing, and what he’s going to do when he turns 90 next year. DR. E. O. WILSON CARTER ROBERTS: Ed, hello. It’s great to see you again. Thanks for having us. E. O. WILSON: Hello, Carter. I’m glad you’re here. CR: When we first met, I was 29 and had just become state director of The Nature Conservancy here [in Massachusetts]. And you were very kind to me. You helped a young kid new to this movement, and I’m grateful. It reminds me that you have two of my most favorite qualities that are rare in combination—intelligence and kindness. And my experience is you’ve always made me feel smarter than I am. EOW: Well, I’m a truth teller. CR: Too many times one meets experts and they are so eager for you to be impressed by how smart they are that you just end up feeling unintelligent in comparison. But you, Ed, have a way of making everyone around you feel smart, and it motivates people to do more. EOW: I guess it was the way I was brought up. CR: We’re both from the South. You’re from Alabama— EOW: Where are you from? I didn’t know you were Southern. I should’ve guessed. CR: I’m from Georgia. In your case, how is it that a boy from Mobile ended up at Harvard? EOW: I never thought I’d leave the South. I was at the University of Tennessee beginning my doctoral studies, and one of the professors there wrote a friend at Harvard and said: this kid does not belong here—invite him to Harvard. And he did. CR: Do you think you have a greater regard for the natural world because you grew up in the South? EOW: Could be. I think it has a lot to do with being able to be outdoors almost year-round. I was an only child. And we moved around a lot, so I didn’t make large numbers of friends every year. I’d just go into the woods and look for snakes and bugs and butterflies. So that’s how I got started. I always loved the outdoors, but I think it was intensified by growing up in the South. I also had the Boy Scouts, so that helped, when we moved. I attended 14 schools. CR: You’re an Eagle Scout? EOW: Oh, yes. I collected almost every merit badge, except for canoeing. I couldn’t find a canoe. CR: You know now they have a biodiversity merit badge. And WWF is launching a global collaborative with scouting to raise awareness about the loss of nature and what that means for humanity. EOW: I’m really glad to hear that. CR: I want to talk to you about your writing career. I think at last count, you’re up to 33 books—is that right? EOW: Yes, 33. I’m working on books 34 and 35 now, writing them at the same time. CR: [Speechless]. EOW: By the time they’re both done, I will be 90. And I’ve decided that if my health holds up, I’m going to stop writing books and go back into the woods. CR: Anywhere specific? EOW: I’ll tell you what my plans are. I’m going to go down to the Florida Panhandle, to the Torreya State Park, along the Apalachicola River ... primarily to just sit there. And then I’ll go up to the Southern Appalachians to do the same ... just sit. CR: It’s a funny thing. When you work on saving nature or you write about nature—it often takes you away from nature. It’s so important for us all to do what we did when we were younger, and that’s to just sit ... to just be there. EOW: To just sit and contemplate nature seems like a luxury, but we could all use a bit more of it in our lives. View all issues h