WWF is only one voice in a much bigger conversation about our world. It’s hard to see ourselves in challenges or events that feel so far removed, so exotic compared to our daily realities ... However, we are connected to these faraway places and events in ways that firmly bind our futures together. PHILIPPE COUSTEAU

Environmental activist and WWF
National Council member, on the global value of Sumatra’s rain forest. CNN, September 13, 2013 PHILIPPE COUSTEAU people signed WWF and Change.org petitions calling for a halt to plans for oil exploration in Virunga National Park signatures on a WWF World Youth Day pledge asking young people to care for the environment Unless the killing stops, African forest elephants are expected to be extinct within 10 years. I can’t even grasp what a great disaster this is ecologically, but also…to lose [this] magnificent creature…seems like such a rebuke to our own values. HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON

Former US Secretary of State, on the threat of extinction of African elephants. The Washington Post, September 26, 2013 HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON Shackleton crossed three glaciers. We only had to cross two—the other one is gone. TIM JARVIS

Environmental scientist and explorer, on The Shackleton Epic, an effort to raise awareness of climate change by reenacting Sir Ernest Shackleton’s failed 1916 expedition. TIM JARVIS Our electric aggregation deal allows all of our citizens to receive 100% renewable energy. … We are going to continue to lead by example. MARK MALLORY

Mayor of Cincinnati, Ohio, on the city’s recognition as a global finalist in WWF’s 2012 Earth Hour City Challenge. MARK MALLORY people took action through WWF and Causes.com, urging Congress to support a moratorium on US ivory trade This is an historic moment in Vietnam’s efforts to protect our extraordinary biodiversity, and provides powerful evidence of the effectiveness of conservation efforts in critical saola habitat. DANG DINH NGUYEN

Deputy head of Quang Nam Forest Protection Department and director of Quang Nam’s saola habitat on the recent camera trap image rediscovery of the saola, an antelope-like mammal not seen alive since 1998. DANG DINH NGUYEN The deterrent effect of having trained detector dogs on patrol should not be underestimated. Wildlife smugglers will be aware the dice are now heavily loaded in favor of them being caught. DR. JIANBIN SHI

Head of TRAFFIC’s China Program, on a new canine force trained to sniff out illegal wildlife parts and products in China’s Yunnan Province. DR. JIANBIN SHI View all issues h