Of course, finances are not the full story. Success also depends upon building appreciation, knowledge, and support for protected area systems within each country. That means bringing all the key players in a country together—to honor the good work they’re already doing, find ways to incorporate that work into the PFP model, and ensure that people whose lives and livelihoods are inextricably tied to natural resources have a voice and a stake in conserving them. Historically, local communities—especially Indigenous peoples—have been excluded from most decisions about their territories and denied the right to control the resources and benefits that flow from those lands. It’s understandable that many of these same communities are now concerned that the implementation of a global strategy to protect large swaths of ecologically important natural places could repeat the wrongs of earlier forms of conservation and ignore their needs, rights, and aspirations, thereby deepening long-standing social and economic inequities. That’s why the need for trusting relationships in which communities take the lead is a cornerstone of the Enduring Earth approach. The future of conservation will require strong partnerships with Indigenous peoples, for the simple reason that they tend to live in and look after the remaining areas of the world that contain intact forests and other critical ecosystems. In many cases these communities have stewarded and protected their lands for generations, accumulating knowledge and experience that will ensure the proper management of protected areas. At the same time, many people living on the edges of protected areas struggle just to get by. If the international community wants to achieve its climate and conservation goals, it also has to ensure that local communities can derive economic benefits from the wild places they are being asked to help protect. As Zdenka Piskulich, managing director of Enduring Earth, describes it, “Effective conservation is not only about the power to protect biodiversity, but also the power to support people’s livelihoods, needs, and rights.” Therein lies the fundamental philosophy behind Enduring Earth. In order to protect nature, people have to do a better job of protecting and empowering each other. And in order to make those protections durable, we must work together at a scale and speed unlike anything we’ve done before. Communities in nations as far-flung as Bhutan and Costa Rica are already leading the way—and providing a road map for how our shared, global community can chart a future in which, through the protection of nature, more people have the chance to thrive. WWF is grateful to the myriad supporters dedicated to our shared vision for the planet’s future. Thanks to all of those listed below, and many others, who helped bring the PFP model to life in Brazil, Bhutan, and Peru, we are advancing an innovative approach to conservation that will help secure a brighter, healthier future for wildlife, people, and the planet. View all issues h