WildAid has been on the front lines of the fight for pangolins, launching its public awareness campaign in 2016 . Our campaign aim s to eliminate the demand for pangolins in the world’s two largest markets – China and Vietnam – through behavior change campaigns designed to educate consumers and make consumption of pangolin products socially unacceptable. Enlisting the power and reach of legendary ambassadors like and China’s superstar Angelababy , and working closely with government and media partners, we have reached some 800 million viewers in these countries with our messaging across dozens of TV networks and on over 160,000 video screens in subways, airports, bus stops, hospitals and shopping centers. Our 2016 warn ed viewers of the potential health risks of consuming pangolin meat and went viral in early 2020 with over 20 million views in just a few days . In June 2020, the Chinese Pharmacopeia Commission omitted pangolin scales from the list of key ingredients in the latest pharmacopeia, Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM). On the heels of this news, WildAid and its partners, the China Wildlife Conservation Association and the Pangolin Crisis Fund, launched a in August 2020 to keep pangolins in the spotlight. These ads reinforced the message that pangolins should be protected and that consumption of their meat and products is illegal. The campaign launched in nine major cities with over 220 ads placed, garnering over 70 million views in the first two weeks. In Vietnam, WildAid and our local NGO partner CHANGE assisted the government with a Prime Ministerial directive prohibiting any hunting, transporting, slaughtering, selling, buying, storing, consuming, or advertising of wildlife, including online sales. To further help educate the public, WildAid, CHANGE, and the Pangolin Crisis Fund launched a series of educational campaigns, including wi th influential Vietnamese ambassadors that urged people to stop consuming wildlife in order to help prevent similar pandemics in the future. Investigations conducted by the Environmental Investigation Agency UK (EIA) have found that have resulted in Nigeria becoming the world’s primary exit point for pangolin scales trafficked from Africa to Asia. The same networks and routes used for the bushmeat trade are being co-opted for international wildlife trafficking. Between 2016 – 2019, , a trade that is estimated to be worth between $7 billion and $23 billion annually. Later this year, WildAid will in major cities across Nigeria to change consumer behavior and will collaborate with local Nigeria government agencies to improve enforcement and communication of exi sting wildlife laws. With global attention on the health risks of the wildlife trade and calls to close such markets, WildAid launched the campaign in November 2020 to accelerate efforts to ensure permanent bans on wildlife markets and the urban bushmeat trade? are enacted and enforced, and demand for such products is eradicated for the future of both humans and wildlife. In China, Vietnam, and Thailand alone , our goal is to significantly reduce the wildlife trade by dissuad ing 87 Million wi ldlife consumers from purchasing and using wildlife products over the next 2 years. and help us protect pangolins while preventing future pandemics.