Looking at the Bright Side this World Environment Day

            
                
                                        

                                                First published in Sanctuary Asia,
                        Vol. 40
                        No. 6, 
                        June 2020
                                            
                
            

                        
By Divya Kilikar

We approach World Environment Day in 2020 with a little trepidation. Our country’s leaders haven’t been doing a great job of recognising and preserving our natural ecosystems for some time now, but this year has been exceptionally appalling. The axe that is COVID-19 fell hard on conservation efforts across the subcontinent, forcing many of our wildlife protectors out of jobs, and presenting poachers and encroachers with ample opportunity. In the last two months, thousands of Indians (but not nearly enough) learned about regions that have held much ecological significance for our nation - that many of you had probably never heard of before - in light of destructive development projects that have been proposed here. The Dihing Patkai Elephant Reserve and Dibang valley are two such regions. We are grateful for your support, and we hope you’ll continue raising your voice against the wrong being done to the very ecological systems that give us life.

However, today, we want to remind our supporters and readers of the reason we’ve all been campaigning hard for ecological justice, in our own ways, be it through art, science or activism - the same reason we fell in love with nature first, as children who followed tiny insects and looked for bird nests. Here’s a look at the astonishing natural wonders that still flourish (albeit in steadily diminishing pockets) across India - parks, sanctuaries and habitats that you may not have heard of before.

Keibul Lamjao National Park, Manipur

Located in Manipur, Keibul Lamjao is probably the world's only 'floating' sanctuary that comprises 40 sq. km. of wetland overgrown with 1.5 m. deep floating vegetation.

 



Image courtesy: Sudipto Das

Apart from the vegetation and terrain, an important highlight of the park is the Loktak lake, the largest freshwater lake in India; a large portion of which falls within the park. Keibul Lamjao consists of the unique 'phumdi' or floating marshes. Eighty per cent of the flora is submerged and the vegetation forms a 90-120 cm. thick cover on the water surface.





Image courtesy: Lenin Khangjrakpam



The entire Loktak Lake was protected and declared a sanctuary in October 1953, primarily to save the sangai deer, which was threatened by extinction. An estimation by the Manipur Forest Department in 2018 states that there are currently 260 individuals of the species, found only in the Keibul Lamjao National Park.



Lahaul Forest Division, Himachal Pradesh

Vast and sparsely populated, Lahaul and Spiti districts, and the Pin Valley National Park whose notified area lies within, are home to the ‘grey ghost of the Himalaya’, one of the few natural wonders found (if you’re extremely lucky) in the harsh, often subzero, temperatures here. 

 



Image courtesy: Shiv Kumar

Photographed by our Mud on Boots Project Leader Shiv Kumar, the world’s most elusive wild cat needs no introduction. The Siberian ibex form the main prey base for the snow leopard.

 



Image courtesy: Shiv Kumar

A solitary creature of the high alpines of the Himalaya, the musk deer has been poached for decades for the musk pod it carries in its abdomen -- interestingly, only by the male. Known for its sweet aroma, it is used in manufacturing perfumes and has spelled doom for the highly vulnerable species. 



Thane Creek Flamingo Sanctuary

The Thane Creek Flamingo Sanctuary, located off the suburb of Mulund, was formally notified only in 2015. The ecosystem spans beyond the notified area of 17 sq. km., its wetland habitats and green vegetation spanning the expanse of Thane Creek, about 59 sq. km.

 



Image courtesy: Sarang Naik

We couldn’t help but throwback to our 2018 Wildlife Photography Awards, when Sarang Naik perfectly captured the wealth of biodiversity only a hop, skip and jump away from bustling urban settlements - flamingos in flight against Navi Mumbai’s high rises.

 



Image courtesy: Adwait Jadhav

Another avian inhabitant of the sanctuary is the Common Kingfisher. The sanctuary is a haven for birdwatchers, who flock (pun intended) here in the hundreds, hoping to spot migrants such as the Red-headed and Black-headed Buntings, Sykes’s and Booted Warblers, and Eurasian Wrynecks in the winters.

 

Melagiris Mountain Range, Tamil Nadu

Many of India-born British writer Kenneth Anderson's highly engaging stories take place in the dry deciduous, scrub, and dry evergreen forests of Hosur and Dharmapuri forest divisions, or the Melagiris. A myriad streams originating in this undulating landscape feed the Cauvery river, which drains much of South India.

 



Image courtesy: Bikash R Das

The health of the Melagiris is not just important for the herds of wild elephants that migrate seasonally through the forests’ ancient elephant corridors. The hills allow for the peaceful movement of these gentle giants, minimising human-elephant conflict, and keeping the Cauvery river gushing - which is necessary for the livelihoods of farmers that live in villages next door.



Image courtesy: Riju Ray

The Melagiris contain vital elephant corridors and also invite tigers moving out of the more popular Bannerghatta National Park and Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary, among other reserves. However, the hills are also home to countless species that often fall into the spotlight, like the Malabar giant squirrel, that occur in a curiously stunning purple hue.



Mount Abu Wildlife Sanctuary, Rajasthan

Located in one of the oldest mountain ranges in the Indian subcontinent - the Aravallis - the dry deciduous forests of Mount Abu, aside from boasting a wealth of floral and avian biodiversity, are also the home of several wild cats and their prey -- from hyenas to sambar deer.

 



Image courtesy: Sandip Patel

Mount Abu’s various peaks range from 500 to 1,722 m. high, and include the highest peak in Rajasthan at Guru Shikhar. The lush mountains are home to a wide range of mammals like the jungle cat, small Indian civet, Indian wolf, golden jackal, and Indian pangolin.

 



Image courtesy: Vickey Chauhan

One of the Indian subcontinent’s least understood large mammals, the sloth bear is a formidable animal. A curious temptation the species is known to give in to is the fleshy calyx of the Mohwa tree, and during this season (May-July), individuals are known to compete for fruits in a frenzy.

 

Our wildlife sanctuaries, national parks and reserves, though surely benefitting from the temporary lack of noise pollution and lowered carbon emissions, are in trouble. They have lost much of their income that came from tourism. As citizens, not only do we need to recognise the biodiversity of our country, but also do our bit to ensure our Protected Areas stay protected. We hope you include some of the wild destinations we’ve featured above on your bucket list, and visit them once the COVID-19 pandemic blows over. In the meanwhile, read all about conservation issues faced by our wildernesses on the Sanctuary website.

            
            

            
                
                    join the conversation
                    
                    
                    
                    
                
                
                    subscribe