Reboot The Planet: Part 2

            
                
                                        

                                                First published in Sanctuary Asia,
                        Vol. 40
                        No. 4, 
                        April 2020
                                            
                
            

                        
To commemorate the 50th anniversary of Earth Day, April 22, 2020, Sanctuary Nature Foundation partners with Book My Show to bring to you an exciting series of online sessions by inspiring changemakers from across the world; bankers, filmmakers, artists, photographers, and activists, who have contributed greatly to environmental protection. The series ran from April 22 to May 8, 2020.

This article is a compilation of the episodes. Part 1 of the episodes can be found here.

Amy Lewis

Vice President of Policy & Communications, WILD Foundation

An award-winning nonprofit leader and a scholar of environmental policy, Amy Lewis' research explores the relationship between democratic decision-making and policies that benefit the environment. Nothing inspires Amy more than a good mystery, and she delights in uncovering the deep forces that determine a society’s political and ecological future.

In this insightful episode, she breaks down the specific reasons why wild Nature is our greatest ally in the mitigation of climate crisis, halting mass extinction, and stabilising human security; and emphasises how wildernesses are essential to lowering chances of pandemics.



Anahita Uberoi 

Creative Consultant, BookMyShow

Anahita Uberoi is an actor, director and producer who has worked extensively in New York, Mumbai and Germany over the last 33 years. Apart from her theatre work, she works closely with Sanctuary to help bring the arts and conservation together. In this episode, Anahita brings her two worlds, of art and her love for nature, together. She points out how nature is in itself art; and how all types of art - fine arts, poetry, films, music, performing arts, theatre - and artists are inspired from nature. 



Jairam Ramesh

Chair Rajya Sabha Committee - Environment, Forests & Climate Change

Jairam Ramesh is an economist and policy expert; he highlights why it is important to emphasise the discourse on ecology and environment from a public health perspective; particularly important now in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic. He further shares the status of India's Environmental laws, biodiversity and ways of mitigating the climate crisis. 



Vance Martin

President of the Wild Foundation

An innovative leader known for bridging the interests of people and nature, Vance Martin has worked in over 45 countries, and helped to establish many non-profits. An acknowledged expert in international nature conservation and wilderness protection, he serves on the boards of numerous organisations and is the founder and current co-chairman of the IUCN Wilderness Specialist Group. He has also edited and authored many publications. In this episode of 'Seek Sanctuary- Reboot the Planet', he talks about the Nature Needs Half movement, the Survival Revolution, and highlights the opportunity the world has now, to create a sustainable economy by stopping  business as usual.



Naseeruddin Shah and Ratna Pathak Shah

Actor-director duo

For this episode, gather your family, children, and friends and settle in for this delightful storytelling session, narrated by actor-director duo Naseeruddin Shah and Ratna Pathak Shah. Titled 'The Mouse Princess' Wedding', a story from the Sangati Programme of the Avehi Abacus Project, Mumbai, the story follows a Mouse King's quest to find the 'most powerful' groom for his daughter. The perfect tale to lighten up your mood! 



Nikkhil Advani

Producer, director, and screenwriter

An award-winning film producer, director, and screenwriter, Nikkhil Advani has contributed greatly to the Indian film industry, having made film classics like Kal Ho Naa Ho, Chandni Chowk to China and Patiala House. He founded Emmay Entertainment which has produced films like Dday, Airlift, Baazaar. In 2006, he worked on India’s first stereoscopic animation film 'Delhi Safari', about the animals in Sanjay Gandhi National Park losing their habitat to illegal constructions; the film won him the coveted National Award in Film-making. A nature-lover, Nikkhil is one of Sanctuary Nature Foundation's ardent supporters and board members. In this episode, he is in conservation with Anahita Uberoi on how COVID19 has highlighted the social inequalities prevalent in our nation, about COCOON Conservancies, and how we perceive life in the new 'Altered Reality' of global lockdown. 



Lord Nicholas Stern

Economist, Academic and Climate Expert

Lord Nicholas Stern is an I. G. Patel Professor of Economics and Government at the London School of Economics, past President of the British Academy, Chair of the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change, and former Chief Economist at the World Bank. He authored the influential ‘Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change’, which he adapted into a book ‘The Global Deal: Climate Change and the Creation of a New Era of Progress and Prosperity’.

In the finale episode, watch Lord Nicholas Stern in conversation with Paul Abraham, Presiden, Hinduja Foundation and Founder of Sarmaya Arts Foundation, discussing the link between biodiversity, economy, and the climate crisis, and "Crafting a Better World" after COVID19.



 

            
            

            
                
                    join the conversation
                    
                    
                    
                    
                
                
                    subscribe