Stop Slaughtering Wildlife

            
                
                                        

                                                First published in Sanctuary Asia,
                        Vol. 40
                        No. 8, 
                        August 2020
                                            
                
            

                        
Prevent the Next Pandemic 

Zoonotic diseases. Pathogens. Bats. Pangolins. Wildlife Trade. Deforestation. Vaccine. Long-term solutions. Questions.

COVID-19 has alerted us to re-evaluate our relationship with nature. Scientists, virologists, epidemiologists and evolutionary biologists suggest that more pathogen spillovers are inevitable unless we evolve a more sustainable relationship with nature.

It is for this reason that the Sanctuary Nature Foundation and The Corbett Foundation are coming together to launch the ‘Stop Slaughtering Wildlife’ – Prevent the Next Pandemic’ campaign.



(Left) An Indian crested porcupine for sale at Sonepur fair, Bihar. Photo: Shubhobroto Ghosh. (Right) The carcass of a Bengal slow loris hanging in a market in Nagaland. Photo: Hira Punjabi.

The aim of the project is to:


	Work with key partners, food and health professionals, government agencies and local communities across India to create awareness about the impact of degradation of habitats and the commercial trade of wildlife species.
	Community upliftment and generation of alternative livelihood opportunities.
	Recognise grassroots conservationists each of whom are contributing steadfastly to biodiversity conservation and community engagement in distinct and measurable ways.
	Work With Government Agencies, Social Media Giants and Advertisers to Target Online Markets Being Used by the Illegal Wildlife Trade.
	Communicate the Consequences of Close Humans - Wild Species Contact.
	Mobilise Communities and Decision Makers.
	Slow Down the Pace of Species Extinction due to the Illegal Trade.


Sanctuary and The Corbett Foundation have launched a  Ketto crowdfunding endeavour for the campaign. 

Donations raised will be used to support grassroots organisations and individuals who will work with us to build bridges with local communities and create awareness about the impact of close contact with wild species (for the wildlife trade, zoos, pets, etc.). Click the button below to head to the page.





Communities identified on the ground:  


	Gond community in Khara village, nestled deep in the forests of Kanha-Pench Corridor, Madhya Pradesh. Read more here.
	Rongmei Nagas community in Dailong, a picturesque village in Tamenglong district, Manipur. Read more here.
	Pardhi community members Batal Pardhi & Mahila bai and Kheer Babu & Kunti bai of Panna. Read more about these Sanctuary Earth Heroes here.
	Karbi community in a Karbi village along the foothills of Karbi-Anglong Hills, Assam.
	Naga Community in Dailong village in Tamenglong, Manipur.


Project Coordinators:






Here’s a ready reckoner with articles, reports and other resources on the ongoing campaign to prevent the next pandemic.

To Read on Sanctuary:

 Recent articles:


	What is the Stop Slaughtering Wildlife campaign about? (2020)
	The Impact Of One Health On Conservation (2020)
	Pangolins in Peril (2020)
	The Pangolin Crisis (2020)
	Tightening the Noose on Wildlife Crime (2018)


Archives:


	Length of Skin, Weight of Bones (2017)
	Guns, Birds and Narikuravas (2015)
	The Wildlife Crime Nexus (2013)
	A Traditional Hunt (2012)
	Dead Meat (2012)
	The Making of ‘The Wild Meat Trail’(2010)
	The Crime Web (2008)
	The Wildlife Supermarket (2006)
	Tragopans and Tribals: A Naga Transformation? (2005)
	The Flaw in the Flu (2005)
	Irulas: The Snake Trackers (2003)
	Can Fibreglass Save the Hornbill? (2002)


To Watch:



How humans are making pandemics more likely. (Source: Vox)  


	Forensics Expert C. Samyukta and Wildlife Law Enforcement Expert Kiran Rahalkar on Illegal Wildlife Trade and the Need to Strengthen Law Enforcement | Wildlife Conservation Trust  (July 2020)
	COVID-19, Humans and Wildlife - What do we know? - Panel Discussion | National Geographic (June 2020)
	Wildlife Crime - A threat to our health | UN Environment Programme (May 2020)
	Sharon Gynup - Wildlife Trade - From Tiger King to COVID-19 | Woodrow Wilson Center (April 2020)
	Jane Goodall on Wildlife Trafficking and COVID-19 | NowThis (April 2020)
	Author David Quammen On The Current And Future Pandemics | Random Thursday | Joe Scott (March 2020)
	How The Wildlife Trade Started The Coronavirus |The Dodo (March 2020)
	How wildlife trade is linked to Coronavirus |Vox (March 2020)
	How Wildlife Trade Is Linked To Outbreaks - COVID-19, MERS & SARS | CNA Insider (February 2020)
	Here’s How Scientists Think Coronavirus Spreads from Bats to Humans |Vice (February 2020)
	COVID-19- Where It Starts and Stops |Wildlife Conservation Society (January 2020)
	How do viruses jump from animals to humans? | TED-Ed (2019)
	Pangolin smuggling in India |Mongabay India (2019)
	Hunting Festival of South Bengal | Film by Human & Environment Alliance League (2019)
	Brief introduction to wildlife hunting in India | Film by WWF (2014)
	Every new pandemic starts as a mystery | David Quammen: TEDxBozeman (2013)
	The Wild Meat Trail | Film by Rita Banerjee (2010)


In the Media:


	Did Pangolin Trafficking Cause the Coronavirus Pandemic? | David Quammen, The New Yorker (August 2020)
	Hunted and Traded for Body Parts, the Bengal Slow Loris Needs a Conservation Strategy | Mongabay (August 2020)
	As Fight Against COVID-19 Intensifies, Healthcare Professionals Push For A Policy To Tackle Future Pandemics | NDTV (August 2020)
	Scientists Call for Pandemic Investigations to focus on Wildlife Trade | Nature (July 2020)
	China is Drawing all the Flak, but is India Controlling its Wet Markets? | The Print (May 2020)
	To prevent the next pandemic, it’s the legal wildlife trade we should worry about | National Geographic (May 2020)
	Public Health Depends on a Healthy Planet | The New Republic (April 2020)
	Crackdown on Wet Markets and Illegal Wildlife Trade could Prevent the next Pandemic | Mongabay (March 2020)  
	Illegal Wildlife Hunting and Trade in Tamenglong, Manipur | Conservation India (February 2020)
	Hunting for Answers: The Scale and Impacts of Hunting, and the Importance of Listening to Hunters | Mongabay (November 2019)
	Wildlife Meat Sold Openly  in Pondicherry | The Hindu (September 2019)
	Pangolin Smuggling to China Thrives as Rhino Poaching Declines in Assam | Mongabay (September 2019)
	Out of India: The Illegal Trade Routes for Pangolin Trafficking | Mongabay (September 2019)
	Of markets, Wet and Pet and a case for One World, One Health | Wildlife Trust of India
	Hunters Target Endangered Pangolins in India | National Geographic (December 2018)  
	In Tamil Nadu, 47 of 53 Waterbird Species are Hunted to Feed a Growing Illegal Demand for Wild Meat | Scroll (August 2017)  
	Wildlife Exploitation: A Market Survey in Nagaland, North-Eastern India | SAGE Journals (June 2013)
	Wildlife hunting by Indigenous Tribes: A Case Study from Arunachal Pradesh, North-east India | Cambridge University (April 2010)



            
            

            
                
                    join the conversation
                    
                    
                    
                    
                
                
                    subscribe