The Birding Brigade

            
                
                                        

                                                First published in Sanctuary Asia,
                        Vol. 42
                        No. 4, 
                        April 2022
                                            
                
            

                        
In 1995, Phoebe Snetsinger broke a world record by being the first person to spot more than 8,000 species of birds. She went from being a housewife to travelling around the globe as a competitive birder. While there have been famous female birders like Snetsinger over the years, birding has mostly been a male bastion. However, in the last couple of decades, there has been increasing interest in birding – even more so by women who are transforming a privileged culture. This has been true in India too, where women are leading the way. We asked a few women birders who participated in Big Bird Day 2022, an annual event that encourages birders of all hues to form groups and go birdwatching, to share their experiences with Sanctuary. Organised by the delhibird Foundation in the National Capital Region, the day is planned during the winter season when avian visitors from Central Asia and further north congregate in the area.



The Eastern Orphean Warbler – one of the birds spotted on Big Bird Day 2022 – is an insectivorous migratory winter visitor to India. Photo: Kavi Nanda.

Jayantika Davé

For me, Big Bird Day is always a day I looked forward to with great anticipation! Weather forecasts are scanned, binoculars lens are cleaned extra carefully, and several decisions are to be made – which team to join, whether the focus should be on locations with the largest numbers of birds, or where the rarities are, and of course, planning the special breakfast to feed hungry birder mouths! February 20, 2022, was no exception. I joined a team of 20 birders scouting in Jhajjar and Chandu in Haryana. We drove through small villages, through yellow mustard fields with the mist slowly lifting, until we turned into the scrub area of Jhajjar. Our very first sighting took our breath away! Short-eared Owls – not one, not two, but four! Sitting on mud ramparts under overhanging bamboo, rising into the air on being harassed by crows, and then settling down again so we could watch them to our heart’s content! When we tore ourselves away, we heard a shout of a… Merlin? Could it be? A Merlin! What an unusual sighting for this part of India! But a Merlin it was, and we spread out for a variety of different views and shots. The day progressed, with us tracking through Jhajjar, and then onto Chandu… through scrubland, and fields, and finally waterbodies. We chalked up 98 species, and our hearts were full! I began birding young, from the age of 10 onwards, introduced to this wonderful hobby by my grandfather, and it is so thrilling to see the tribe growing – binocular birders, photographer birders, and ornithologists focusing on a single species. It is also wonderful to see the growing number of women who have joined – young and old, active or slow, knowledgeable or learning, but in each, the flame burns strong! Special days like Big Bird Day reinforce the sense of community, bonding and learning. May our tribe continue to increase, together with the numbers of our avian friends!



A large aquatic bird, the Great White Pelican can be found near shallow wetlands and waterbodies as it mainly feeds on fish. Photo: Kavi Nanda.

Mamta Muttreja

Big Bird Day started before the turn of the century, spurred by the visionary leanings of a few founding members. We began small but with continual guidance and coaxing, exploded into thousands of bird enthusiasts. The group is a cross-pollination of various disciplines, from pure science to citizen science, from art to technology, from literature to theatre, from advocacy to education, ecology and conservation – all forming a homogeneous, yet diverse population bound by a love for birds. The fact that there are no rules to this event makes it even more attractive and draws large numbers. As the day approaches, collective prayers are sent heavenwards for clear skies and good visibility.

When I was going through a particularly difficult phase in life, a good friend and fellow birder introduced me to photography and birdwatching. Being an empty nester, I had the time, energy and passion, and did a deep dive from which I am yet to surface. I have since discovered that the birding community is an indulgent lot. Camaraderie is an important factor and we have often been guilty of over-sharing. Women birders are super-efficient at keeping scores, and are appreciated for their sharp senses, quick reflexes, and of course, food-related multitasking. Specially curated trips and walks are regularly shared, and women often outnumber men. A special shoutout for all the naturalists and organisers here is necessary, simply because of the efforts taken to make women feel more than equal, especially on solo trips. Although each region in our very diverse geography has birding hotspots, particular favourites being Sattal, Dandeli, Mishmi, Corbett and the Great Rann of Kutchh in India, Mara in Kenya, and the east coast and the Rockies in the U.S.A., my favourite haunt remains literally in my backyard – the Mangar Bani forest on the outskirts of Gurgaon, a place I visit at least twice a week.

On BBD this year, 30 groups of birders armed with binoculars, scopes, cameras and notebooks made their way at daybreak to their choice of grasslands, forest, wetlands and waterbodies. My group was halted in its tracks at Jhanjhraula, by a flurry of wingbeats of the Short-eared Owls. Our magic continued as the rarely sighted Merlin made an appearance – making our day, week and season!

Much like us, each group had their personal high points. Collectively, the day’s specials were the Merlin, Short-eared Owl, Great-crested Grebe, Osprey, Spotted Dove, Eastern Orphean Warbler, White-capped Bunting and Black Eagle, with a total of 214 species sighted.

As the season draws to a close, another prayer has been sent upwards for the safe passage and arrival of our visitors to their conflict-torn homes. May we have more seasons of plenty in the years to come.



Women birders participating in Big Bird Day 2022. Photo: Nikhil Devasar.

Ashima Kumar

We birders are a peculiar lot, exhibiting strange behaviour from time to time as we flock in numbers and migrating long and short distances to our favourite spots. We wake up at the crack of dawn chasing the ‘bird in the bush’, with camera and binoculars in hand and happily chirp our merry sightings, exchanging joyful nods about what we see. Once the birding bug has bitten you the addiction is life-long and there is no cure.

A great stress buster for city-weary nerves, birding is more than just a hobby, it’s a citizen science project. What one observes and records forms a database that can help monitor bird behaviour, distribution and migratory patterns. An activity once relegated to scientists, researchers or students who would record their sightings in notebooks as diagrams, sketches and writings, has now exploded and is popular with people from all walks of life. Notepads have been replaced by cameras and scopes. Photographic records and sightings are carefully documented. As a woman who abhors driving, I am delighted to carpool with other birders and freely share our experiences and knowledge.

I was introduced to birding a few years ago by a friend who told me about Big Bird Day. I was a little apprehensive at first and not too sure about what I was supposed to do. As it turned out, all that was required was to get out and observe birds. It was a fun activity that entailed recording the birds one saw on that day. One could just record birds in one’s own garden or in neighbouring green spaces or join a team and travel to a nearby forest or wetland. That year, I just ended up observing, identifying and recording birds on my farm. I was astounded to see so many birds in a fairly small area. These birds had been around me, but I had not taken the time to patiently watch them. I was hooked and since then, I have not looked back. I soon began joining small groups of fellow birders and my discoveries over time have amazed me.

Living in the Delhi NCR, in the humdrum of an urban city like Gurgaon, one tends to overlook how rich the birdlife is in the area. The forests of the Aravallis, the wetlands of Sultanpur and Jhajjar, even the cultivated village fields are a treasure trove of some of the most fascinating bird species.

Though we bird throughout the year, the sightings on BBD are particularly special and provide comparative records with previous years. This year, in the Delhi NCR region, 30 teams headed out, cameras, scopes and binoculars in hand, to record what they saw in over 25 different locations. The day’s count threw up 214 species including the Merlin – a rare sighting, as it is seen here only every three to four years. The other special sightings were Short-eared Owls, Great Crested Grebes, a Black-hooded Oriole and even a Great White Pelican.

I am a ‘fledgling’ birder. The learning along the way has been tremendous as one unearths not just birds but comes to understand their migratory patterns, habitats, diets and bird behaviour. It is a happy malady that, to my mind, should infect every individual out there. There is so much beauty around us! Activities like this create awareness and enforce the need to preserve our wilds from the onslaught of human action.



The Black Francolin is a vocal bird, and despite its rich colours, is quite adept at merging with its habitat. The birders at Surajpur Bird Sanctuary heard Black and Grey Francolins but did not sight them. Photo: Kavi Nanda.

Anita Mani

Bins (binoculars) in the bag. Scope checked. Layers laid out for the early morning departure. And the food… it’s always been a big part of my Big Bird Day traditions. It’s always idlis for breakfast (steamed at 4 a.m.!), to be consumed with sambar and chutney, followed by a big lunch. And of course, snacks in between to fuel the gang. All of this travels in massive hot cases that are pulled out of the storage cupboard the evening before. But I digress (the delhibird food obsession is hard to kick).

For the last decade, our BBD trip has been to Dighal/Bhindawas/Jharli, all around 80-100 km. from Delhi. This means a very early start, involving crawling through thick fog on the highways around Delhi, fervently hoping that we don’t end up in one of the many pile-ups that punctuate the highway. This year we headed out to the NTPC plant at Jharli, where the ash fields, cooling water reservoirs, marshes and thickets in the massive compound have created a lovely habitat for birds.

By 7 a.m., the destination had been reached, and the binoculars were out, scanning for early morning warblers. This is the best part of my BBD – the morning is ripe with the promise of a full day out with friends and fellow-birders, looking for birds. This year, the marshes at Jharli had several interesting warblers such as the Moustached and Paddyfield, with the largest population of Marsh Harriers I have ever seen in one place sweeping through the pink-tinged skies that were clear of the Delhi pollution. The reservoirs teemed with ducks, and we were lucky to find 11 Great Crested Grebes. This diving duck is an uncommon visitor to the area, and even more so in such numbers.

The best part of being a birder is the places it takes you to and the people you meet. Birding is the best mindfulness exercise I know – surrounded by birds on the wing, in the water and singing from the bushes, you cannot be anywhere but in the present. Is it tough being a woman birder? I would say yes, if you are travelling alone in isolated habitats. But in NCR, with trusted friends from the birding gang – never! Birding has always been my safe space.



Big Bird Day participants scramble up stony, scrubby slopes, chasing the whistles, chirps, tweets, and clucks they hear. Photo: Nikhil Devasar.

The overall count for BBD was low this year– just 214 species for the NCR, far lower from the 250-260 species one would expect to see. The sudden rise in temperatures may have hastened the spring return migration, though it is also possible that the heavy rainfall of the 2021 monsoon created an abundance of waterbodies, scattering the flocks. Yet, some very nice birds were seen – a Merlin in the fields close to the Sultanpur National Park, a Black-hooded Oriole at Surajpur and the grebes at Jharli. The largest species list came from the Mandothi wetland in Haryana that shot to fame with the spotting of the Red-breasted Merganser in December 2020.

But BBD is not about big lists, lifers or sharp photos. It is about getting out there, walking through mud, sand and stones to catch a glimpse of a feathered friend.

Afshan Husain

When I got a call asking me to cover the Surajpur Bird Sanctuary on Big Bird Day, it didn’t take me long to say yes. The place is no less than a birding haven. I had fallen in love with it in my initial days of birding: on the very first visit, which was also my first bird count. It is a beautiful waterbody with a side patch of lush green trees and a wooded area that is home to numerous warblers, cuckoos, owls and woodpeckers. The waterbody hosts thousands of migratory birds in the winter season.

My usual partner in crime, my husband, Tanweer wanted to end his COVID-19-imposed birding hibernation and eagerly signed up on my team. Our birder friends Sirish, Shalini and Mohan decided to join us. We all agreed to meet at the sanctuary gate by 7 a.m. Groups are more fun: more eyes can spot more birds and there is safety in numbers. While the caution of going in groups is not limited to lady birders, it is more pertinent to them. Another challenge that lady birders face disproportionately is that most birding destinations don’t have proper toilet facilities, so you have to plan accordingly.

I am a bit of a loner and I had started off as a lone birder about six years ago. It all began with a super-zoom camera that I purchased to click the moon. In no time I was clicking birds and expanding my horizon of birdlife beyond crows, sparrows and pigeons. A bird count event led me to discovering the vibrant birding community of Delhi-NCR, and with them I went to places I would not have visited otherwise.

On the morning of Big Bird Day, we entered the Surajpur Bird Sanctuary from its new gate as access to our usual gate has been lost to rampant and haphazard construction. The morning was good; there was no fog, the sky was clear and the sun was out. We were greeted at the gate by an Indian Roller perched stoically between the leaves of a palm tree, almost like a statue. The new gate has opened easy access to the areas that were hitherto difficult to reach. As we started on the mud trail counterclockwise, the morning silence was broken by loud and incessant calls of common resident birds, hinting that the breeding season had arrived. A tiny Ashy Prinia ensured that it got our attention with its continuous tchup tchup, and zeet-zeet calls, while constantly hopping and flicking its tail. Soon a Rufous Treepie could be heard on a tall tree, trying to entice a mate with its screeching call. As we moved ahead, scanning the reeds on the right-hand side of the trail, we saw a big flock of silverbills: some foraging and some taking a mud-bath along the trail. A good number of Common Chiffchaff flitted between branches and bushes along the entire trail. Grey and Black Francolins were quite vocal but didn’t make an appearance. The waterbody was full of Bar-headed Geese, Northern Shovelers, Gadwals, Eurasian Teals, Northern Pintails, Eurasian Wigeons and a few Ruddy Shelducks. They all looked decked up in bright sparkling plumage against the clear blue water. It was a sight that gave us immense pleasure. As I tried making a video of Bar-headed Geese sitting on a mound soaking in the sun, I was distracted by a Black-headed Ibis pair mating and getting the job done in a jiffy. Love was in the air, and it made for a very pleasant and lovely morning of birding.



With the appearance of the not-so-common Orange-headed Thrush, the Big Bird Day group in the Surajpur Bird Sanctuary recorded a total of 104 sightings for the day. Photo: Kavi Nanda.

We walked for almost an hour before we met other members of the group who were covering the trail from the opposite side. We were also joined by veteran birder Dr. Kalra and biker-birder Sudipto. We exchanged notes and made a comprehensive list of all the bird sightings. The species count was approaching 100 and we took it as a signal to have our customary breakfast after a good session of birding.

“Black-hooded Oriole,” exclaimed Dr. Kalra, while we were busy stuffing ourselves with homemade delicacies. He ran towards the direction of the call. We followed and in no time, heard a melodious, fluty call and saw a subadult Black-hooded Oriole. Just as we were taking photos of this beauty, another not-so-common bird flew past – an Orange-headed Thrush offered a fleeting glimpse and a few photos to some of us. These two, seen towards the end, were also the highlights of BBD at Surajpur. We ended with a count of 104 species. It was a rich haul for three hours of birding.

On our way out, we saw the morning’s Indian Roller perched at the same spot between palm leaves. It took off as we were leaving the sanctuary. All in all, it was a good and satisfying culmination of a wonderful BBD.



The Surajpur Bird Sanctuary was teeming with ducks like the Northern Shoveler (pictured here), Bar-headed Geese, Gadwals, Eurasian Teals, Northern Pintails, Eurasian Wigeons and a few Ruddy Shelducks. Photo: Kavi Nanda.

Sheila Chhabra

There is a buzz in the air. A special Sunday has been blocked off on the calendar. Teams are being formed, enrolments are happening, areas are being demarcated, recce visits are being conducted. Backend preparations include cleaning of equipment, charging of batteries, setting of alarms and sustenance in the form of huge quantities of scrumptious food and drink getting packed. Finally, at the crack of dawn it begins – Big Bird Day! This annual event, when enthusiastic amateur birders from all over India and even abroad, scour their designated locations and count avian species, is also a way to monitor the health of habitats, note fluctuations or trends in both the population and species of birds, and have tremendous fun while doing so!

I first began noticing birds as a part of holiday homework – not mine, but my daughter’s. She had been given an exhaustive project, which entailed digging up information, taking photographs, constructing nests, reading up on Sálim Ali and more. In the process, I began to really see birds. Every chirp, every flutter, revealed a different kind. I realised that we had over 20 species visiting our garden and the trees around us, everyday! After a little research, we discovered birds that could stitch, weave, construct homes out of mud, saliva, cobwebs, stones, or hammer them out of tree stumps. A few, like the cuckoos, outsourced childcare, or spent their energy making love gardens like the bower birds, or starved and froze and carried their eggs on their feet! The colours, the displays, the dances – it was an endlessly fascinating world and I was hooked!

The school project was submitted and now my own project began: to find a group of people I could join for birding. In today’s age of Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp it can be done with a single click, but 20 years ago, it took almost 11 months to see a post about a bird walk in the Habitat Centre calendar and finally connect with delhibird!



The birders saw four Short-eared Owls in the scrubland area of Jhajjar. Photo: Kavi Nanda.

The group was amazing. Everyone was welcome regardless of age, sex, levels of experience or knowledge. You could ask any question, however basic, and an answer would be given. You could misidentify the commonest bird countless times and be gently corrected with a smile. Books, telescopes, and anecdotes were all freely shared. And then, of course, there was the ginormous breakfast spread at the end! Fortunately, this community has grown in leaps and bounds, with people from all walks of life, from photography enthusiasts to children, all participating in a hobby that brings endless joy. The greatest pleasure is to see the faces of first-time birders light up when they have a close look at the distinct bill of a Spoonbill or the pink tail feathers of the Painted Stork or hear the call of the Sarus! There is always something new to see, some new behaviour to observe. And there is a sense of comfort and camaraderie in spending a morning with like-minded people who get a high from being outdoors and in nature; a sense of community that has kept me birding for over two decades now, joining in all the Sunday mornings that I can, and of course, being a part of the special Big Bird Day.

If you have not signed up for birding already, I highly recommend you do so! Happy birding!


 

            
            

            
                
                    join the conversation
                    
                    
                    
                    
                
                
                    subscribe