Six more coronavirus infected victims have succumbed to the disease in Assam on Tuesday. Health minister Himanta Biswa Sarma took to Twitter and stated the deceased details. The death toll has now pushed to 46. Nine people died in flood-related incidents in Assam on Tuesday pushing the death tally to 85, while, 33 lakh people across 28 districts of the state are affected severely affected, according to the Assam State Disaster Management Authority (ASDMA). Close to 86% of coronavirus infection cases in India are confined to ten states out of which 50% of cases are from Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu, stated the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The remaining 36 percent cases are from the eight states of Assam, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Telengana, and the union territory of Delhi. The class 10th results of the Central Board of Secondary Education will be declared on Wednesday at 10 AM. Union HRD Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal Nishank tweeted to inform students about the Class 10 CBSE Board Examinations results. The Satra Mukti Sangram Samiti (SMSS), the student unit of KMSS leader Manash Konwar has been released in bail from Guwahati Central Jail. Konwar was granted bail on Monday by NIA court but he was not released from jail given an excuse of the jail premises being declared as Containment Zone as large numbers of its inmates are tested positive for COVID-19. Indian Railways' production unit, Rail Coach Factory, Kapurthala, has developed a Post COVID Coach to combat COVID-19. The Post COVID Coach has hands-free amenities, copper-coated handrails and latches, plasma air purification, and titanium di-oxide coating for COVID free passenger journey. Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal reviewed the flood scenario in Jonai and announced Poba Reserve Forest, the biodiversity hotspot in Dhemaji, would be upgraded to a wildlife sanctuary. Poba Reserve Forest, declared in 1924 with an area of 10,522 hectares, is home to a large number of flora and fauna. Sikkim on Tuesday reported its highest single-day spike so far with 46 new COVID-19 cases pushing the tally in the state to 198. The total number of active cases in the state stood at 112, while 86 patients have recovered. With a net worth of 72.4 billion US dollars, Mukesh Ambani has become the sixth richest person in the world, as per Bloomberg Billionaires Index. The Chairman of Reliance Industries surpassed Elon Musk, the founder and owner of the giant Tesla. Sachin Pilot has been removed from the position of the Deputy CM of Rajasthan. Govind Singh Dotasra has been appointed as State Unit Chief. CM Ashok Gehlot's proposal to remove Pilot from his position was earlier approved by Rajasthan's Governor Kalraj Mishra. Sanjay Jha on Tuesday was suspended from the Indian National Congress with immediate effect "for anti-party activities and breach of discipline". The order was issued by Maharashtra Congress and signed by the state unit chief Balasaheb Thorat, and the announcement was made on the INC Maharashtra Twitter handle. A research article published in the journal Nature Communications by doctors in France have claimed the first confirmed case of a newborn infected in the womb with COVID-19 by the mother. The baby boy, born in March, suffered brain swelling and neurological symptoms linked to COVID-19 in adults, but have since recovered. Students of DU colleges demand that online Open Book Examinations be cancelled and their evaluation be done based on their previous semesters performance. Hemang Amin, the Chief Operating Officer of the Indian Premier League, has been appointed interim chief executive officer (CEO) of the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI). The move comes only days after Rahul Johri's resignation as the BCCI CEO was accepted. In a major shift in its policy towards China's maritime claims in the South-China Sea, the USA officially rejected almost all of the significant claims made by Beijing. So far, the US had been insisting that the maritime disputes that China has with its smaller ASEAN neighbours be resolved amicably under the stewardship of UN.