The Bharatiya Janata Party on Tuesday kickstarts the Jan Samvad virtual rally in Assam. At the rally, BJP's president Jagat Prakash Nadda, in connection to the Citizenship Amendment Act, 2019, reiterated, CAA will not be implemented in the Sixth Schedule areas of Assam and states having Inner Line Permit. However, he did not comment on the sixth clause of the Assam Accord. BJP president Nadda stated under the leadership of Narendra Modi the country is prospering, "The world now considers India as one of the most powerful nations". The leaders also paid tribute to the martyred Indian soldiers in the Galwan valley clash. Nadda said, "During these trying times of Indo-China faceoff, we stand by our jawans. We are fighting the pandemic COVID19. These are adversities. But, we are blessed by Maa Kamakhya and hence we are still fighting against any catastrophic events that come India's way". He added, "BJP workers have been working tirelessly to serve the people of the nation during this pandemic". He stressed, there are over 1000 hospitals created for the treatment of COVID-19, and over 4.5 lakh PPE kits are now available across the nation. He further said the Bharatiya Janata Party has contributed magnificently to develop India and changed how politics is perceived across the nation. In the virtual rally, besides the BJP president, Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal and State president Ranjit Kumar Das were present. CM Sonowal said, "BJP members and workers are a source of inspiration and strength". He added, "I came to Dispur in a bid to make Assam corruption-free and in the last four years the government has been able to successfully sustain the practice". The CM continued, "APSC (Assam Public Service Commission) cash for job corruption has been eliminated".  He further reflected, "Corruption has been eradicated in departments of water supply, social welfare and at the Panchyat levels". Poachers have been evicted to protect wildlife and stop rhino hunting. Women who have been victim of sexual harassment have been served justice in a fast-track way. Sonowal emphasized during BJP's term, four medical colleges have been established across the state and extensive work is being carried out in the health sector. Under Atal Amrit Abhiyan underprivileged citizens are being treated. Rupees 55 thousand crores have been invested in such initiatives. The State president Ranjit Kumar Das said BJP has been successful in safeguarding the Jaatii-Bheti-Meti of Assam, and added, "We have been successful in fighting corruption in Assam". He also acknowledged Himanta Biswa Sarma went to Manipur to resolve the state's ongoing political instability.