Following is the complete text of the draft agreement between Govt of India and Bodo organisation " The Modality with inclusion of the DISTINCT CLAUSES forMEMORANDUM OF SETTLEMENT between the Government of Assam/India & NDFB(Progressive)" 1. TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION ANDAPPLICATION OF POWER BY THE COUNCIL/ TERRITORY: a.Thecouncil shall exercise its power on the executive, legislature, and judiciary. b. All the provisions of sixth schedule except 1(2) andother relevant articles of the constitution of India will apply in the Council/Territory. c. Subject to special provisions, Article 371(G) willbe applicable for specially safeguarding the social and customary practices andland laws within the jurisdiction of the Council/Territory. 2. RE-ORGANIZATION OF DISRICTS: Theundermentioned existing districts within the state of Assam will be re-organizedand included within the Council/ Territory for effective administration andspeedy development of the region. (1) "Gossaigaon" curving out fromexisting Kokrajhar District. (2) Kokrajhar District. (3) Chirang District . (4) "Manas"curving out from existingBaksa District. (5) Baksa District. (6)  "Bhergaon" curving out from existing UdalguriDistrict. (7) Udalguri District. Extension of the present Bodoland Territorial Councilby inclusion of the following districts by newly creation after bifurcation ofthe existing districts- (8)  "Mainaosri" curving out from existingSonitpur District. (9)"Holongi"district curving out from the existing Biswanath district &some parts of  the Lakhimpur district. 3. FINANCE ANDSOURCES OF FUNDING: a. The Government of Council/Territoryshall have full authority over its finance and utilisation of the finance. b.The council/ territory will also receive the direct funding from the schemes ofCentral Government, such as – (i)  Centrally Sponsored Schemes/ Centrally aidedschemes, (ii) Central Sector Schemes, (iii) External aided schemes, (iv) Flagship Schemes, (v) Allotment of fund fromthe DONER/NEC. c. Considering the requirement for the direct flow offunding to the council/territory, the Union Government shall make necessaryamendments and arrangement to notify and include the council/territory asdistinct member of the NORTH EASTERN COUNCIL (NEC) and thereby provide aseparate entity to the council/territory. d. Direct allocation of fund will be made to thecouncil/territory by NITI AAYOG for implementation of various schemes as perthe plan and proposals submitted by the Government of Council/Territory. e. A provision for distinct State/Territorial PlanningCommission will be made for adequate representation of the Council/Territoryfor ensuring appropriate allocation of the funds to the council/territory. 4. INTERNAL REVENUE GENERATION(IRG): Special provision will be made along with necessaryamendments by the centre/ state government, in case needed, for applying thefollowing policies and provisions for the self generated Internal RevenueGeneration. a. Excise being a transferred subject to thecouncil/territory, the total share of excise duties &taxes in respect ofthe manufacturing and the sales within the jurisdiction of council/territorywill be received by the council/territory as a significant source of its own internalrevenue generation. b. The Council/ Territory will wholly receive the landrevenue in respect of the land resources within its jurisdiction. c. The Council/ Territory will have the total controlover the source of funds received in the form of revenue against the ForestRoyalty Clearance in respect of the Forest Resources. d. The Council/Territory will have control over thegeneration/ distribution of power/energy and the revenue gained in return ofthe distributed power will be credited to the public exchequer of the Council/Territory.  Therefore, the department ofpower and energy will be transferred to the council from the State of Assam. e. Besides the aforementioned sources of revenuegeneration, the Council/ Territory will have the authority to collect all kindsof revenues, duties, and taxes as specified in the State List of theconstitution of India to outsource and generate its own revenue apart from thefunds received from the centre and the state. 5. LAND AND IMPLEMENTATION OF LANDRIGHTS: a. TheCouncil/ Territory will have all the control and exercise its power over theland revenue and disaster management department. b. Forensuring safeguard to the land of the tribal and other indigenous communitiesas well as appropriate implementation of the land rights, the Council/Territorywill accordingly exercise its power over the territorial jurisdiction as perthe provisions made in the Boroland Land Policy Framework. c. Allthe provisions of the existing land policies in the State of Assam includingthe Assam Land Revenue and Regulation Act, 1886 as amended in 1947 will beapplicable to the Council/ Territory, subject to the Boroland Land PolicyFramework accorded in consequence of this Memorandum of settlement. d.Necessary arrangement will be made by the centre to include Boroland Land PolicyFramework in the Ninth Schedule of the Constitution of India. e. Tomonitor the appropriate implementation of the existing land policies and theBoroland Land Policy Framework for the safeguard of the tribal and otherprotected class of communities within the Council/Territory, a commission inthe name & nomenclature of "COMMISSION FOR LAND RIGHTS" will be immediatelyconstituted with strong empowerment. (ANNEXEDHEREWITH THE PROPOSAL FOR BOROLAND LAND POLICY FRAMEWORK WITH NECESSARYPROVISONS FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF LAND RIGHTS, POWERS & FUNCTIONS OF THE "COMMISSIONFOR LAND RIGHTS" AS ANNEXURE-1) f. Thecentre/ state will enact necessary ordinance to immediately bring the BorolandLand Policy Framework in force. g.The Government of India shall grant a special package of 5 (five) crore towardsmeeting the cost of establishment for general administration of the Commissionfor Land Rights (CLR). 6. GRANTING ST(HILLS) STATUS TO THE BORO/BORO KACHARI COMMUNITYINAUTONOMOUS DISTRICT/ KARBIANGLONG: As already been accorded in the Bodo Accord of 10thFebruary, 2003, the centre will immediately implement the same and passnecessary bill in the parliament for granting Scheduled Tribe (Hills) to theBoro/ Boro Kacharis living in the Autonomous Districts region/ Karbi Anglong. 7. CONSTITUTIONAL SAFEGUARD TO THE BOROPEOPLE  LIVING OUTSIDE THE COUNCIL/TERRITORY: The people belonging to the Boro/ Boro Kacharicommunity as notified by the Constitution (Scheduled Tribe) Order, 1950 who areliving outside the Council/Territory shall be provided special safeguard underthe Article -244(2) of the Constitution of India. 8.  DELIMITATION AND RESERVATION OF CONSTITUENCIES: (a) A delimitation committee comprising therepresentatives of the Council, State and Union Government shall be constitutedto reconstitute the Assembly, Local Body and the Parliamentary constituencies withinthe Council/ Territory. (b) 65 (SixtyFive) percent of both the local body and the assembly constituencies shallbe reserved for the scheduled Tribe Community and the rest 35 (thirty five) percent shall be kept openfor the participation of all. (c) All the parliamentary constituencies within theCouncil/ Territory shall be reserved for scheduled Tribe candidate. (d) One number of Rajya Sabha member berth will beallotted to the Council/Territory and the nominee shall be unequivocallynominated by the local government of the Council/Territory. However, thenominee should compulsorily belong to the communities notified as ScheduledTribe under the Constitution (Scheduled Tribe) Order, 1950. 9. PROTECTION, PROJECTION, ANDPROMOTION OF IDENTITY: The Boro people and the other indigenous tribalcommunities within the Council/ Territory shall be provided the specialprivileges and opportunity to represent in all the national events of India,such as: (i) Celebration ofIndependence Day and Republic Day. (ii) National LevelGames & Sports. (iii) National LevelCultural Festivals. (iv) Olympics &Internationallevel games & sports. (v) National Level cultural events organized by theGovernment Agencies in India. (vi) Globally promotingthe Boro Cultural Troupe in International cultural events/stages. (vii) Establishment of "Bathou Harimupuri"at Kumarikata near Guwahati- Bhutan National Highwayat Baksa District. (viii)Establishment of "Bathou Kheraisali" at Raja-Dhakmol, Gobardhana at BaksaDistrict. 10. JOBS ANDSERVICES: The Government of Council/Territory shall be competentto make appointment in all the post under its control in accordance with rulesof appointment. There shall be Boroland Public Service commission (BPSC) or anequivalently competent authority for conducting competitive examinations/ interviewsfor and recruitment in various administrative posts and other GRADE-1 andGRADE-2 services.  As per the proposalsubmitted by the Council/Territory, the Union Government shall consider forgrant in aid towards meeting the cost of the general administration. Needlessto mention that the Council/ Territory will have its total authority in theappointment procedure of the Grade III and Grade IV services as already beenaccorded in the Bodo Accord signed on 10Th February/2010. 11. EDUCATION: A. The government of the Council/Territorywill have total control over the Higher Education including the technical andmedical institutes like engineering colleges, medical colleges, agriculturecolleges, etc. B.The Centre and the state government will provide the following support &assistance to the government of the Council/ Territory to improve the qualityof education within the region with developed educational system andinfrastructure. TheGovernment of India will extend special package, and within a stipulated timebound of 5(five) year will establish the following institutes in the Council/Territory as mentioned below for the educational welfare of the region- (1)The centre will provide financial assistance as well as allow external funding fromrelevant sources to the Council/Territory to expedite the Implementation ofRight to education Act, 2009, especially in the villages within the forestareas inhabited by the scheduled tribe forest dwellers. (2) Special package for the digitization of all theeducational institutions from the High School level upto college level withsmart class infrastructure. Additional special package will be provided for Provincialisationof all the Bodo Medium schools from lower elementary level to the Senior Secondarylevel. (3) Establishment of separate directorate for the BodoMedium education. (4) Establishment of Central Government Funded RajaMahiranga National Tribal University (like that of Amarkantak, MP) inBhairabkhunda, Udalguri, with special provisions for the ST candidates inregards to employment and enrolment in the university. (5) Establishment of a Central university under theMHRD, Govt. of India apart from the existing Bodoland University, Kokrajhar. (6)Establishment of Central Government funded residential Model schools (BodoMedium). (7) Establishment of one model school at eachdevelopment block within the every districts of the council/territorycomprising lower primary section to senior secondary section with state of theart amenities and modern infrastructure (Affiliated to CBSE/ICSE syllabus) centrally funded by the union government ofIndia to reach out the marginalised educational quality among the scheduledtribe and other indigenous communities of the council/territory. The Centre will sponsor the project for theestablishment of the schools as per the proposals along with the allocation ofland for the purpose submitted by the government of the council/ territory. (8) A Separate institutional establishment of NationalInstitute of Technology (NIT) apart from the existing Central Institute ofTechnology. (9) IndianInstitute of Technology (IIT). (10)Establishment of Institutions directly managed and controlled by the Governmentof India for especially coaching the tribal students for UPSC, IIT JEE, GATE,CAT, CLAT, NEET and NET examinations. (11)Indian Institute of Information Technology (IIIT). (12) Indian Institute of Management (IIM). (13)  Indian Railway EngineeringInstitute. (14) For the medical welfare towards the backward people of the region,an AIIMS will be set up within the Council/Territory. (15) A "Boroland Institute of Medical Sciences (BIMS)" with premiertechnological infrastructure will be established at the Udalguri District apartfrom the existing medical college at Kokrajhar. (16) Cancer Institute. (17) Ayurvedic Medical College. (18) Homoeopathic Medical college. (19) Textile Engineering College . (20) Agriculture College. (21) Establishment of Engineering College at Baksa District. (22) Establishment of Polytechnic College within every districts of theCouncil/Territory. (23) Establishment of Industrial Training Institute (ITI) in every subdivision of the Council/Territory. (24) Dairy College. (25) Architecture College. (26) College of AnimalHusbandry& Veterinary Sciences in every sub division of theCouncil/Territory. (27) Fishery College. (28) Institute of ForestManagement. (29) College of Fine Arts inevery districts of the Council/Territory. (30) Two Nos. of NationalSchool of Drama within the Council/Territory. (31) Establishment of NationalInstitute of Design in Baksa district. (32) National Institute ofFashion Technology (NIFT). (33) National Institute ofNursing (34) Two Nos. of NationalInstitute of Law/ National Law University within the Council/Territory. (35) Establishment of a SainikSchool under the control of Ministry of Defence. (36) Upgradation ofKokrajhar Govt. College to a non affiliating Central University. (37) Establishment of anIndianInstitute of Hotel Management. (38) Establishment of ArmySchool in every district of the Council/Territory. (39) Accord special provisions for scholarship fromthe Government of India for the Tribal students of the Council/Territory forpursuing higher education in any discipline in any premier institute of Indiaand abroad as well. (40) Provincialisation of all the non-recognisededucational institutions established by various local educated youths/faculties for the educational welfare of the region in the Council/Territoryincluding 19 Nos. of Degree colleges and 14 Nos. of Junior Colleges. (41) Establishment of Vocational Institute funded bythe central government. 12. GAMES &SPORTS: Forbringing into reality the vision of Honourable Prime Minister of India, Shri NarendraModi Ji for a "FIT INDIA" and in a view to encourage the sports activities alongwith fitness and accuracy in an equivalent level of formal education among theyouth of this region, the institutions as mentioned hereinafter will beestablished within a stipulated time bound of 5(years) by the government ofIndia. (1) A Sports University in the Council/ territory. (2) National Institute of Physical Education in every districtof theCouncil/territory. (3) National School of Sports in every districtof the Council/territory (4) SAI centre in every district headquarters and subdivisions. (5) Five football turfs in each districts of the council/territory. (6) National stadium with world class amenities for both the outdoor andindoor games. (7) A Sports stadium in compliance to the FIFA guidelines. (8) State of the Art "Shooting range" at every district headquarters. 13.PRESERVATION OF CULTURE, TRADITION AND LANGUAGE: Topreserve and promote the rich history, culture, traditions and customs,language, art and folklore of the Boro and various tribes living in theCouncil/ Territory in wide verse globally, the centre will take initiative forsooner establishment of the following- (1)Tribal Art Gallery cum Museum at Tamulpur, Baksa. (2) Boro Research Centre for History, Art, Culture and Linguistics inNew Delhi. (3) Boro Language Promotion Bureau under Ministry of HRD. (4) Centre for Folklore Studies. (5) BodoLanguage shall be the used as the official language while on the other hand Assamese,Hindi and English will continue to be used for the same purpose as associateofficial language within the jurisdiction the Council/ Territory. (6) Bodolanguage being included in the 8th scheduled of the Constitution ofIndia, shall have be notified as the associate State Language of Assam and requisitestatus to the Bodo language will be accorded within the state of Assam. 14. REGIONAL PASSPORT SEVA KENDRA: Aregional Passport Seva Kendra shall be established in the Council/Territory to curtailinconveniences faced by the general people of this region from the tout whocharges exorbitantly in the procedures for obtaining a passport. 15. FORMATION OF BOROLAND REGIMENT/BOROLAND RIFLES AND RECRUITMENT OF BORO YOUTH IN INDIAN ARMED FORCES, PARA-MILITARY FORCES AND RAILWAY POLICE: (a)  Formationof Boroland Regiment/ Boroland Rifles in Indian Army with special provision ofreservation for candidates belonging to the Council/ Territory. (b) Recruitment of 5(five) thousand Boro & otherindigenous scheduled tribe Youths belonging to the Council/Territory in each ofthe following armed/ paramilitary forces through special recruitment drive. (i) Assam Rifle through special Recruitment Drive. (ii) In Indian Military forces (Army,Navy, and Air Forces). (iii) Para-military Forces (BSF, SSB, ITBP&IRBN, CRPF, CISF) (iv) Railway Police Force (RPF). (c)Recruitment of 5(five) thousand unemployed and educated Boro and otherindigenous tribal Youths in the 3rd and 4th Grade postsof the Indian railway. (d)  Raising of 8th Boro Battalion inthe IRBn. 16. PROMOTION OF ECO TOURISM, PRESERVATION OF WILDLIFE SANCTUARY ANDNATIONAL PARK: Adequate fund will be provided by the centre and thestate as per the plan & proposals submitted by the Council/Territory todevelop the infrastructure of the following and promote eco-tourism to generateself employment among the unemployed youths of the council/region and a sourceof Internal Revenue Generation. (a) Jamduar (b) Saraichar Lake (c) Dheer Bil(Lake) (d) Deeplai Lake (e) Kachugaon (f) Chakrasila wildlife sanctuary (g) Ultapani (h) Manas National Park (i) Kalamati (j) Bagamati (k) Bornadi Wild Life sanctuary (l) Dwisam (m) Bhairabkunda (n) Lalpani (o) Orang National Park (p) Sonai Rupai wild life Sanctuary (q) Nameri National Park (r) Bathoupuri (Kameng) (s) Ramghat (t) Sesa Dwiand (u) Creation of Heritage Villages for the Development of Village Eco-tourismas well as preservation of folklore, culture, history, heritage and arts inregard to the several indigenous communities within the council/territory. 17. TRADE ANDCOMMERCE: (a) Special Provisions of border trade will be implementedfor formulation and channelization to liberalise the international trade towardsthe people of the council/territory to trade on locally produced agriculturalproducts, live-stock, handicraft, and other commodities with the neighbouringcountries. (b) Every residents belonging to any community of theCouncil/ Territory will have equal rights over trade and commerce to contributetowards the sustainable economic development of the region. Keeping in view of maintaining the stability ofeconomical sustainability among the economically underprivileged scheduledtribe communities, any person other than Scheduled Tribe who does notoriginally belong to the council/ territory shall not be eligible to beentitled with the trade licence in regard to the business activities ofwholesale and distribution. However, operation of business by the existing bonafide citizens of India who have already been issued the trade licences withinthe Council/territory shall remain in continuum with no conditions applicableto them. 18. INNER LINEREGULATION: Necessary arrangements/ amendments will be made toimplement as well as enforce the provisions of Bengal eastern frontierRegulation, 1873 and Chin Hills Regulation Act, 1896 and Foreigner (ProtectionAreas) order, 1958 in the Council/ Territory. 19. PROVISIONOF DOMICILE, VOTERSHIP AND WORK PERMIT: The electoral roll for Council/Territorywill be revised/ prepared accordingly and consequently the domicilecertificates will be issued to the residents. A person will be only eligible tocast his/her vote in any election within the Council/Territory if his/herpreceding generations' name(s) were found to be enrolled in the Voter List of1971, or before, or Legacy Data of 1971 or before in compliance to the finalNational Register for Citizens from any constituency within the Council/Territory. There shall be a system of work permit in the Council/Territory. Any outsider having documents of Bona fide citizenship (but notdomicile or originally belonging to the council) shall have to procure workpermit from the Council/ Territorial Government to carry out his professionlike – corporate business, trade, contract works, employment in private undertakings,drivers, labourers or any private service sector. On the grounds of government service, private job orany casual employments, the outsiders other than the existing residents/voterspresently residing within the council shall not be entitled to transfer andenrol their names in the voter list/ enrolment from the constituenciesbelonging outside to the council. The persons allowed to stay within thecouncil/territory for a time being on work permit will not be entitled to havethe privilege of votership and caste their votes in general election,legislative council including the local body election from the constituenciesfalling in the council/territory. 20. DIVISIONAL BENCH OF GAUHATI HIGHCOURT: To enable a suitable frame of law and justice as wellas for the effective judicial functionaries and time to time disposal, aDivisional bench of Hon'ble Gauhati High Court shall be established within theCouncil/ Territory. 21. GENERALAMNESTY: The government of India shall grant general amnesty tothe convicts of the NDFB (if any) as well as withdraw all the cases/ chargesframed/charged under any IPC/ CRPC/ Acts like TADA/POTA/UA(P) Act, etc by anystatutory body like NIA/CBI/CID/ State Police on the members of NDFB and thesympathisers or members of the civil society related to the movement activitiesof NDFB. The government will have to release all the members/ patronisers ofNDFB who are now in jail due to judicial custody or under trial prosecutionbefore the signing of the memorandum of settlement. 22. INFORMATIONOF NDFB CADRES AND LEADERS WHO ARE MISSING IN ACTION: The government of India shall provide detailinformation of the cadres and leaders of the NDFB who have been missing inaction since "Operation All Clear" in Bhutan, 2003 and from Dimapur since 9thMay 2004. 23. RELIEF ANDREHABILITATION: (i) For empowering the economical stability of thefamilies of NDFB Cadres and leaders who sacrificed long years if their livesfor interest of the tribal people of this region, the Government of India shallinstantly provide relief and rehabilitation to the NDFB members after thememorandum of settlement. (ii) Special Recruitment of the cadres of NDFB having thequalification of graduation in any subject and manner from any recognizeduniversity to be appointed in commissioned rank equivalent to the DSP,viz-a-viz the cadres/members having the qualification of Intermediate/HSSLC asSub Inspector (SI), similarly the cadres/members possessing the qualificationof matriculation as the Assistant Sub-Inspector (ASI) and under matriculatecadres/members of NDFB as constables in the state police/ paramilitary forces. (iii) One time Financial aid of an amount of Rs. 15,00,000.00(RupeesFifteen Lakh only) be extended by the Union Government of India to the membersof NDFB who are unable to join the government service due to health conditions/educational ineligibility or other justifiable grounds. (iv) Payment of ex-gratia amounting Rs. 10,00,000.00(Rupees Ten Lakh only) shall be provided by the Union Government of India tothe heir/ dependents of the NDFB members as well as the civilians who sacrificedtheir life and families for supporting the movement of NDFB. The list of suchbeneficiaries will be prepared by the Signatories of this Memorandum ofSettlement in compliance to the recommendation received from the competentmembers of the NDFB and subsequently the same will be forwarded to the centre bythe government of Council/Territory. 24. SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE &DEVELOPMENT PACKAGE TO THE COUNCIL/ TERRITORY BY THE CENTRE: SpecialFinancial Assistance & Package will be directly provided by the centralgovernment to the Council/territory for the accomplishment of the followingwithin a stipulated time frame. The government of Council/ territory willsubmit the plan of the scheme and provide land for the purpose- (a) Grant of specific special financial assistance ofRs. 100 crore (One hundred crore) annually per district for consecutive 10years for speedy development of infrastructure within every districts ofcouncil. (b) One time financial assistance of Rs. 300 crore(Three hundred crore) for the construction of the hostels of the members of thelegislative council assembly which are yet to completed even after 16 years ofthe signing of the Bodo Accord, 2003. (c) One time financial assistance of Rs. 500 crore(Five hundred crore) for the construction of staff quarters for the secretariatsub-ordinates and employees. (d) Apart from the specific special financialassistance of Rs. 100 crore, as mentioned in the clause 22 (a), a separate onetime financial assistance will be provided by the centre for the constructionof the general administrative infrastructure of the newly created districts andsub divisions. (e) Special package of Rs 1000 crore (One thousandcrore) for setting up of one smart city in every sub division of the Council/ Territory. (f) Construction of well planned ring roads connectingevery district and sub divisional headquarters of the Council/Territory. (g) Special package of Rs. 1000 crore (One thousandcrore) for Construction of the black topped roads connecting every village tothe Districts and Sub-divisions of the Council/Territory. (h) Special package of Rs. 1000 crore (One thousandcrore) for Construction of four lane roads connecting the National Highway fromall the districts and Sub-divisional head quarters of the Council/ Territory. (i) A four lane alternative National Highway (withnecessary fly over and bridges) across the Council starting from the Duarregion of Bengal to Murkongselek, Assam. (j) One time special package of Rs. 50 Crore (RupeesFifty Crore) for digitisation of all the educational institutes from the highschool up to college level with smart class infrastructure and digital contentsfor teaching. (k) Special package of Rs. 50 Crore (Rupees Fifty Crore)will be provided by the centre for construction/ setting up of Community space/Community Centre at every Village Council Development Committee level forupholding the social integrity of the tribal and other indigenous villagerswithin the Council/Territory. An additional package of Rs. 50 Crore (RupeesFifty Crore) will be provided by the centre for the upliftment of the locallanguages, literature and preservation of the regional traditions and customsas well as for ensuring smooth functioning of the publications and renownedwriters. (l) Special Central Grant in aid amounting Rupees 30 Crore(Rupees Thirty Crore) will be sanctioned for the construction and developmentof model sports' field with mini stadium (wherevernecessary) at every Village Council Development Committee level. (m) Special Grant in aid from the centre amounting Rs5 Crore (Rupees Five Crore) will be sanctioned and provided every 3 year forthree consecutive times to the registered co-operative society of NDFB fortaking up various initiatives of social entrepreneurship within the Council/Territoryby also involving the women related to the families of the martyrs/members/cadresof NDFB. (n) Construction of RCC bridge capable for conveyance ofheavy laden vehicle over the Dhansiri river near the present barrage Dam ofBhairabkunda to connect as the life line of "Tri-Juncture" of Assam, ArunachalPradesh and Bhutan. (o) Special package of Rs. 1000 core (One thousandcrore) for Construction of Railway Crossing Flyover bridges at Srirampur,Gossaigaon, Fakiragram, Tipkai, Chapatgram, Bansbari, Basugaon, Sarupeta,Bijni, Barpeta Road town, Rangia, Khandigorh, Goreswar, Khairabari, Kukrakata,(West Tangla) Tangla, Harisinga, Udalguri, Daifang, Rowta, Mazbat, Hugrajuli,Dhekiajuli Road, Missamari, Rangapara, Swibari, Gohpur, Gogamukh, Silapathar andJonai. (p) One time package of Rs. 50 crore (Fifty crore) forsetting up of an Inter State Bus Terminal (ISBT) in the Council/Territory forimprovement of the transport services and interconnection with interconnectionwith the neighbour states. (q) Special package of Rs. 300 crore (Three hundredcrore) for Construction of Bodoland Guest House at Chennai, Vellore in thestate of Tamil Nadu, Shillong in the state of Meghalaya and at Mumbai in the stateof Maharastra for the accommodation of various people of the Council/territoryvisiting these metropolitan cities for health, educational and officialpurposes. (r) One time package of Rs. 100 crore (One hundredcrore) Construction of hostels in the national capital of India to accommodatethe Tribal students of the Council/ Territory (for both boys and girls)funded and controlled by the unionGovernment of India. (s) SpecialPackage of Rs. 1000 crore (One thousand crore) for Setting up of Hydel Powerprojects in potential rivers of the Council/ Territory such as- Sankosh, Hell,Swrmanga, Aai, Manas, Mora Pagla, Pagladia, Puthimari, Dhansiri, Belsri,Ghabaru, Bharali, Borgang etc. (t) Keepingin view of the natural ecosystem and the utility of the renewable andnon-conventional resource of energy, power generation solar plants will be setup/constructed at every sub-division of the Council/Territory and a package ofRs. 500 crore (Five hundred crore) will be provided by the centre for the  construction of the solar plants. (u) Constructionof central government funded Entrepreneurship and Management Institutions in everydistricts of Council. (v) Smallscale Industries based on Agriculture, Live stock, handloom and textile, andother handicrafts will be set up to accelerate the rural economy of theCouncil/ Territory. (w) Onetime special package of Rs. 50 Crore (Fifty Crore) will be provided by thecentre to construct the tea processing factories in a view to promote the localeconomy. (x) Toensure the accessibility of pure drinking water in the region, special package ofRs. 300 crore (Three hundred crore) will be granted by the centre for settingup of the Drinking water projects of 100 million litres capacity along with theconstruction of several distributor and reservoirs in every districtof thecouncil/ territory. (y) Toenhance the agrarian economy and promote the integrated traditionalagricultural practices, the centre will provide a special financial package ofRs. 300 crore (Rupees three hundred crore) to the Council/Territory such thatthe government of council/territory can extend financial assistance to theregistered societies/ trusts/ co-operative societies for taking up suchinitiatives and strengthen the local economy generation. (z) Topromote the film/cinema and cultural affairs in the region and keeping in viewof internal revenue generation, one time special financial package of Rs. 100 crore(Rupees One Hundred crore) will be provided by the centre for construction ofcinema hall/ cinema hub in each sub-division of the Council/Territory. 25. TRANSITIONAL PERIOD: (a)  On reaching the political settlement with theGovernment of India and Assam, the Government of India will prepare a Bill forsuch amendments in the constitution, as may be necessary, in order to implementthe decisions/ clauses as accorded in the MOS. Before presenting the draft billin the parliament it shall be shown to the signatories of the accord and the leadershipof the organizations who stake claim. (b) AnInterim Body shall be immediately constituted comprising the signatories ofthis Memorandum of settlement including the leaders of other stakeholders toassist and advice the governor in the administration of the council/territoryduring the transitional or intervening period till re-election. The tenure ofthe office of interim body shall no less than be 5 (five) years andsubsequently the election will be declared and notified. .