The devastating flood in Assam has claimed five more lives on Sunday, taking the toll to 102. Overall flood situation in at least four districts improved on Sunday but over 24.76 lakh people still remained affected by the deluge in 23 districts. The Government of Sikkim has extended the lockdown till August 1 in view of the rising number of coronavirus cases in the state. The decision to extend the lockdown comes on the day when Sikkim reported the first COVID19 death. Ten personnel of the Assam Police Football team tested positive for COVID-19 on Saturday. The infected persons have been shifted to Khanapara COVID Care Center. Another two persons succumbed to COVID-19 in Assam on Sunday, taking the toll to 79, informed State Health and Family Welfare Minister Himanta Biswa Sarma through his twitter handle. The Satra Mukti Sangram Samiti (SMSS), the student wing of Krishak Mukti Sangram Samiti has opposed the Draft Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Notification, 2020 issued by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC). SMSS Working President Manas Konwar said that the Bharatiya Janata wants to sell the resource of Assam to the Capitalists but the people of the state won't accept that. Sikkim reported its first COVID-19 death on Sunday after a 74-year-old man succumbed to the disease at a state-run hospital here, a senior health official said. DoNER minister Jitendra Singh on Sunday spoke to Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal over the telephone to discuss the flood situation and assured all possible assistance from the DoNER Ministry to restore and repair infrastructure damages caused by incessant rains, floods, and landslides. As a tribute to soldiers who fought valiantly and made supreme sacrifice in the Kargil war, President Ram Nath Kovind on Sunday presented a cheque of Rs 20 lakh to the Army Hospital (Research and Referral), Delhi, to buy equipment that will help doctors and paramedics to combat the COVID-19 pandemic effectively. Prime Minister Narendra Modi will launch high throughput COVID-19 testing facilities on July 27 via video conferencing. These facilities will ramp up testing capacity in the country and help in strengthening early detection and treatment, thus assisting in controlling the spread of the pandemic. One person was killed when several shots were fired during a Black Lives Matter protest in downtown Austin, Texas, on Saturday evening, authorities said to a news agency. Oscar-winning Indian musician AR Rahman says that he's not getting enough work in the Hindi film industry because "there is a whole gang working against him." The musician said, See, I don't say no to good movies, but I think there is a gang, which, due to misunderstandings, is spreading some false rumours". Another rhinoceros at Kaziranga National Park died on Sunday due to the devastating floods that have severely affected the wildlife and livestock in Assam. The death tally of rhinos has spiked to fourteen now. A day after Nagaland reported its first death due to coronavirus, three more people infected with the disease passed away. A family in West Bengal's Purba Medinipur district was forced to bury a 70-year-old man, who died of COVID-19, in the compound outside their house on Thursday night after waiting for 12 hours for authorities to come and take his body. Defence Minister Rajnath Singh today said if an enemy attacks India, it will give a befitting response as shown in Kargil. He made the remarks on the 21st anniversary of the country's victory over Pakistan in the Kargil War.