India is an amazing land with an ancient history and vibrant cultural heritage. In this distant mysterious country every traveler will find something close to him. In India there are no borders of nationalities and religions, here reigns peace and harmony. It is amazing how most of the travelers who visit this country once, come back here again and again. Here is a list of the most marvelous and wonderful places in India. Taj Mahal Source: tajmahal.gov.in Taj Mahal is one of the Seven Wonders of the World, which is located in the city of Agra near the Yamuna River in India. This beautiful building is a masterpiece of Mughal architecture, combining elements of Persian, Indian and Islamic architectural styles. It was built in 1648 by Emperor Shah Jahan in memory of his loving wife, Mumtaz Mahal. The construction lasted for 21 years. The most notable component of the Indian Taj Mahal is the white marble cupola. The walls are also lined with polished translucent marble with elements of precious stones and gems. Lotus Temple Source: delhitourism.gov.in Today for many visitors the Lotus Temple is the primary attraction in New Delhi. The temple is built of snow-white marble in the form of a blossoming lotus flower consisting of 27 marble "petals". This amazing building does not even have a single straight line in its construction. The total area embraces a garden of 10.5 hectares. The temple is surrounded by nine pools, creating the impression that the "lotus" blooms on the water. And at nightfall, the lights are turned on to illuminate the temple from all sides. The Lotus Temple welcomes all with departments devoted to all world religions. Periyar National Park and Wildlife Sanctuary (PNP) Source: wikipedia Periyar National Park and Wildlife Sanctuary in Kerala is the largest reserve located in southern India covering an area of 350 sq km. It is a natural tropical forest, which stands on picturesque hills offering a chance to admire the magnificent meadows and lakes. Periyar is also a haven to many animals such as elephants, tigers, leopards, deer, gaurs and cheerful macaques. The reserve offers exciting experiences. One can either go to boating on the lake or can embark on a safari and can even enjoy both the experiences. The venue is also suitable for walking trips and also travelling on a Jeep. Dudhsagar falls Source: twitter Dudhsagar is one of the largest waterfalls in India, which is located in the foothills of the Western Ghats. Its height is 310 meters. Water extravaganza, virgin rainforest and savouring the unfolding landscapes will not leave anyone indifferent. The road to the waterfall passes through the Bhagwan Mahavir Nature Reserve. The park offers its tourists fantastic walks along the forest trails and mountaineering to those passionate about climbing the sheer cliffs to the top of the waterfall. Also, an unforgettable experience will be an elephant safari to the surrounding jungle. Curious tourists can visit the Devil Canyon (Devcharacho) and admire the unique geological formations created by the course of the Kandepar River. Taj Lake Palace Source: taj.tajhotels.com The Taj Lake Palace was built as a royal summer residence in the middle of Rajasthan's Lake Pichola in the 18th century. Today it is a luxurious 5-star hotel and undeniably one of the most beautiful in the world. Tourists are brought here by boat from the pier on the eastern shore of Lake Pichola. The palace became popularly known in 1983 after the shooting of one of the James Bond films took place here. Taj Lake Palace is built of precious and rare white marble that gives it such a breathtaking view. Palolem Beach Source: beachesofindia.com Situated in Goa, Palolem Beach is the most beautiful beach in the beach capital of the country. It is a natural bay, surrounded by promontories on both sides. The sea here is always calm and waveless. This beach can be an ideal place for connoisseurs of good hotels, inexpensive restaurants, vibrant nightlife and a large number of free, liberated, like-minded people. Also it will be an excellent place for a date. Plunge into the culture of this wonderful country and discover all its verges and you will certainly find a part of India that will be close to your heart.