Live updates end here. Sharing a video on X of a "memorable" Kaziranga visit, Prime Minister Narendra Modi invited people from all over the world to visit the UNESCO World Heritage Site. A memorable visit to Kaziranga. I invite people from all over the world to come here. pic.twitter.com/N1yW4XKRyx The Prime Minister inaugurated several key projects under the Prime Minister’s Development Initiative for the North Eastern Region (PM-DevINE) scheme, including the groundbreaking for a Medical College and Hospital in Sivasagar and a Hemato-Lymphoid center in Guwahati. Additionally, he initiated significant ventures in the oil and gas sector, such as expanding the capacity of the Digboi Refinery and the Guwahati Refinery Expansion, among others. Addressing the gathering in Assam's Jorhat, PM Modi acknowledged the warm reception and love he has received from the people of Assam saying he felt fortunate to dedicate development projects for the people. Here is the speech live: Prime Minister Narendra Modi virtually inaugurated the Tinsukia Medical College in Assam and also laid the foundation stone of Sivasagar Medical College today. Stating that this is the 16th time PM Modi has visited Assam since coming to power in 2014, Chief Minister Himanta Biswa Sarma said that his visit to Kaziranga will help boost tourism. "He spent more than two hours in Kaziranga today," he said. Assam Chief Minister Himanta Biswa Sarma highlighted the importance the Centre gives to the state, said that this is the 16th time after PM Modi came to power in 2014 that he has visited the state. Watch it live: Dressed in traditional Ahom attire, PM Modi inaugurated the statue of legendary Ahom commander Lachit Borphukan at Lachit Maidam in Jorhat's Holongapar. He paid floral tributes at the 125-foot tall statue. Here are the live visuals from the event: Hon’ble Prime Minister Shri Narendramodi Ji is dedicating the Statue of Valour: A magnificent tribute to Lachit Barphukan - to the people of Bharat at Jorhat. https://t.co/OxR5uVeXLc The chopper carrying Prime Minister Narendra Modi landed in Assam's Jorhat at a temporary helipad near Holongapar ahead of the inauguration of Lachit Borphukan's 'Statue of Valour'. The PM will address a gathering there and dedicate projects worth Rs 18,000 crore to the people of the state. In a landmark visit to Arunachal Pradesh, Prime Minister Narendra Modi spearheaded a momentous occasion by inaugurating the Sela Tunnel in Itanagar and launching the UNNATI scheme, aimed at bolstering industrial growth in the North East. Gleaming Lakhpati Baideos, the beneficiaries of the Lakhpati Didi program, implemented by the Ministry of Rural Development, have started arriving at the venue for PM Modi's address in Jorhat. #LakhpatiDidis from Assam start arriving for the meeting of Hon’ble Prime Minister Shri @narendramodi meeting venue in Jorhat.#ModiParivarAssam pic.twitter.com/ZZWhXhNg0k PM Modi batted for the idea of Viksit Bharat Viksit Northeast as he began his speech in Arunachal Pradesh. The Prime Minister will dedicate 41 projects worth Rs 41,000 crore in the state today. Here's the live feed: We are committed to making the Northeast the growth engine of India. Addressing the 'Viksit Bharat Viksit Northeast' programme in Itanagar.https://t.co/dhHibYEwJG Prime Minister Narendra Modi will dedicate projects worth a whopping Rs 41,000 crore to the people of Arunachal Pradesh, chief minister Pema Khandu informed. A monumental step towards #ViksitBharat, Viksit Arunachal Pradesh!

In a historic initiative, Hon'ble PM Shri @narendramodi Ji will be inaugurating, laying foundation stone and ground breaking projects totalling Rs 41,000 crore in our State today.

These projects will herald a… pic.twitter.com/SlJYRwo6mk While at Kaziranga, PM Modi interacted with the Van Durga team made up entirely of women forest guards. They are at the forefront of the conservation efforts in Kaziranga. Interacted with Van Durga, the team of women forest guards who are at the forefront of conservation efforts, bravely protecting our forests and wildlife. Their dedication and courage in safeguarding our natural heritage is truly inspiring. pic.twitter.com/MUL19gK8aD At around 9:45 am, the Prime Minister will leave for Arunachal Pradesh from the Panbari helipad, our sources say. Prime Minister Narendra Modi witnessed first hand the natural beauty of Kaziranga national park from atop elephant and jeep when he took safaris inside the vast expanses of the World Heritage Site. PM Modi is set to first fly out to Arunachal Pradesh today where he will be unveiling several development projects before again coming back to Assam. Here the PM will inaugurate the much awaited statue of Lachit Borphukan in Jorhat. He will address a gathering and dedicate projects worth close to Rs 18,000 crores to the people of Assam. Tomorrow, to honour the indomitable spirit of Lachit Barphukan and to celebrate his valiant resistance against invaders, Hon’ble Prime Minister Shri @narendramodi ji will dedicate the 'Statue of Valour' situated in Jorhat, to the people of Bharat. #ModiParivarAssam pic.twitter.com/cMMGgsUFBW Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who spent the night in Kaziranga, took a safari early today morning to venture into the Kaziranga National Park. Here are some visuals: Visuals of Hon’ble Prime Minister Shri @narendramodi undertaking a safari at Kaziranga National Park this morning. @PMOIndia #ModiParivarAssam pic.twitter.com/spGXogfbYg Prime Minister Narendra Modi was accorded a warm welcome upon arriving in Assam's Golaghat ahead of spending the night in Kaziranga and then taking a safari tomorrow. The people gathered to greet him, while a special cultural event was also on show. Here are the images: As Hon’ble Prime Minister Shri @narendramodi ji reaches Kaziranga National Park,  #ModiParivarAssam comes out in large numbers to welcome their very own family member to the World Heritage Site. pic.twitter.com/gqEuLBuDEr With a minor delay in arriving, there has been some changes to Prime Minister Narendra Modi's plans for tomorrow's Jorhat visit. Sources say that the PM will land at a temporary helipad near Hollongapar at around 12:05 pm on March 9, tomorrow which is near to Lachit Maidam. Apart from spending the night and witnessing the diverse flora and fauna the Kaziranga National Park has to offer, PM Modi is set to unveil the 'Statue of Valour' of legendary Ahom commander Lachit Borphukan tomorrow in Jorhat's Hollongapar. The Assam Chief Minister, during a press conference yesterday said, "PM Modi will arrive in Jorhat district and ceremonially inaugurate the statue of Bir Lachit Borphukan which we have named as the ‘Statue of Valour’. At Meleng Meteli Pathar, he will dedicate several projects to the people of the state on behalf of the Assam and Central governments. At the same event and venue, PM Modi will unveil 5,55,550 houses to the people under the Prime Minister Awas Yojana scheme beneficiaries. This will be historic because for the first time such a huge number of houses have been provided to beneficiaries at a single event." Ahead of Prime Minister Narendra Modi's Assam visit, chief minister Himanta Biswa Sarma addressed a presser to discuss the itinerary of the trip. After spending the night at the Assam Police Guesthouse in Kohora, Prime Minister Narendra Modi will begin his Kaziranga tour early tomorrow morning. Pratidin Time sources claim that there are slight changes to PM Modi's schedule with some delay in his arrival, possibly owing to his responsibilities elsewhere. Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who begins his two-day Assam visit today, has landed at the Tezpur airport in Assam. At the Tezpur airport, Chief Minister Himanta Biswa Sarma and Governor Gulab Chand Kataria received him. মা কামাখ্যা আৰু মহাপুৰুষ শ্ৰীমন্ত শংকৰদেৱ গুৰুজনাৰ পুণ্যভূমি অসমলৈ মাননীয় প্ৰধানমন্ত্ৰী ডাঙৰীয়াক মোদী পৰিয়ালৰ হৈ উষ্ম আদৰণি জনাইছোঁ৷#ModiParivarAssam is thrilled to welcome our beloved Prime Minister Shri @narendramodi ji to the land of Maa Kamakhya and Mahapurush Srimanta… pic.twitter.com/bQVAJCz6fI