Greater Kaziranga recorded one of the highest numbers of migratory water birds in the country during the 5th water-bird census conducted through citizen science initiative on January 9 and 10, 2024. The preliminary results of the 5th Kaziranga Tiger Reserve Water-bird Count cum Festival revealed the presence of 84,839 birds which is a 27% increase since the last count (66,776 in 2021-22). Assam Forest Minister Chandra Mohan Patowary earlier inaugurated the Bird Census cum Festival on January 9, 2023 at Agoratoli, Kaziranga. On January 10, 2024, simultaneous bird census was conducted across 115 water bodies spread across the 3 divisions of Kaziranga Tiger Reserve. Conservation Significance Salient Features of the 5th Water-Bird Censusvis-a-vis Previous Bird Censuses 4.       The 4th Water-bird census was carried out during December 2022 for a duration of 5 days across the important wetlands and rivers of the Tiger Reserve. A total of 66,776 water-birds were recorded during this exercise. The Eastern Assam Wildlife Division, comprising mostly of the Kaziranga National Park area, recorded 37,606 birds and the highest abundance of a single species (Bar-headed Goose) was recorded at Sohola Beel (13,084 individuals). Rowmari beel under Nagaon Wildlife Division (Nagaon Wildlife Division) recorded the highest number of birds across all wetlands (19,301 individuals). Under this Division, (Laokhowa and Burhachapori Wildlife Sanctuaries and Joysagar Doloni of Kaliabor) the highest abundance of birds recorded was of Northern Pintails (8,960 individuals). Under Bishwanath Wildlife Division, the highest abundance of birds (2,727 individuals) was reported under Dipora Area under Eastern Range Gamiri followed by 2520 individuals at Kutainee beel under Western Nagshankar Range. Importance of Wetlands Outside Kaziranga NP&TR There are over 200 wetlands across the Kaziranga Tiger Reserve and a significant area of the Brahmaputra River and its tributariesare protected as part of the 6thAddition of Kaziranga National Park and 1st Addition of Burhachapori Wildlife Sanctuary. The results of the 5th KTR Water-birdCensus reinstates the importance of Kaziranga wetlands as a globally important habitat for local and migratory water-birds. Key Species Highlights Some of the unique, rare and endangered species reported during the present Census are: Adding vibrancy to this celebration are volunteers from esteemed Universities, Colleges,NGOs, Institutions and Conservation Societies dedicated to fostering environmental stewardship. Their active involvement in various activities, including educational workshops and awareness campaigns, underscores the collective responsibility towards preserving our natural heritage, making the 5th KTR Water-bird Census cum Bird Festival the greatest ever Citizen-Science driven conservation effort.