The blame game of syndicate rise in Assam has not yet over and in a fresh new allegation, Assam Pradesh Congress Committee (APCC) Spokesperson Apurba Kumar Bhattacharyya on Thursday has once again raised the issue of syndicate saying that the cattle syndicate, coal syndicate and sand syndicates are rising at an alarming rate. Congress MP Pradyut Bordoloi last week said that Assam Chief Ministerhas a direct link with coal syndicate and it is only in his instruction thatsyndicates took place in the state. Moreover, replying to Bordoloi's statement, Assam Minister of Commerceand Industry Chandra Mohan Patowary said that the state government will handover the syndicate inquiry to the CBI and that Sonowal has no link withsyndicates in Assam. Patowary also challenged Bordoloi to prove Sonowal's linkwith syndicate with valid documents. Meanwhile, Congress Spokesperson Bhattacharyya while addressing a pressconference on Thursday at Rajiv Bhawan in Guwahati said that the corruption andsyndicates are rising at an alarming rate during the BJP-led government in thestate than the previous years. Bhattacharyya also asked the Chief Minister that he is not associatedwith coal syndicate directly or indirectly then he should prove it. Further, raising the issue of Nowgong and Cachar paper mills,Bhattacharyya said that Sonowal, after coming into power assured that the twopaper mills will be revived but now the Centre has decided to completely shutdown the paper mills. Bhattacharyya and Spokesperson Rhituporno Konwar who was also presentin the press conference alleged that the BJP is a corrupted government and thatcorruption has increased during the BJP-led government both in the Centre andin the state. Both Bhattacharyya and Konwar asked Sonowal to clarify the reasonbehind decision of completely closing down of the two paper mills. They also raised the issue of coal excavation from the protected areasand asked how it can be possible to excavate coal from such areas. They furtheralleged that the coal excavation is taking place in many places of wildlife sanctuariesin the state.