DC Of Tinsukia District Bhaskar Pegu has tested positive for COVID-19 today. Earlier in the day, he had distributed cheques among the victims of Baghjan fire in the presence of MLA Sanjay Kishan, SP Shiladitya Chetia and officials of OIL. Nalbari district has been adversely affected by the pandemic. 45 people have tested positive for COVID-19 in Nalbari district on Saturday. People from several Hajo villages staged a protest today in front of Office of the Circle Officer of Hajo over not getting flood relief from the government. After facing lockdown for around two weeks, Guwahati finally can heave a sigh of relief. Relaxations have been announced for two weeks. Identified as Sukleshwar Neog, the person was reportedly aggrieved and distraught over Oil India Limited (OIL) not determining the compensation for the people affected by the Baghjan Fire. Assam Health and Family Welfare Minister Himanta Biswa Sarma on Saturday said that there will be no new appointment in the state until and unless the coronavirus pandemic gets over. A fire broke out at a quarantine centre on Saturday in Chapar Rajah Chakra area of Dhubri district in Assam. Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal has constituted a one-man inquiry commission to investigate into the allegations of illegal coal mining and destruction of biodiversity in Dehing Patkai Wildlife Sanctuary. Amid the ongoing lockdown imposed in Halflong of Dima Hasao district of Assam, home-quarantined persons are yet to receive any relief materials from the concerned administration. Congress leader con Saturday said that the entire nation is with the people of Assam who are fighting against the devastating flood. He also lauded the people of the state for their self-determination in the fight against the floods. Amid the devastating flood situation in Assam, the Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) has now predicted an intense rainfall spell over Northern and Northeastern parts of the nation from July 18 to July 21. In a relief to the passed out class 12 students of the country this year, the admission criteria for Indian Institutes of Technology, or IITs, have been relaxed, announced the Union Minister of Human Resource Development Ramesh Pokhriyal 'Nishank'. A 40-year-old woman infected with coronavirus was allegedly sexually assaulted at a quarantine centre in Mumbai by another inmate. The Assam Police informed as of Friday evening a total of 788 personnel have tested positive for the coronavirus infection, out of which 377 corona warriors have recovered so far. The Ram Mandir Trust, set up on the Supreme Court's directions to manage the construction of a temple for Lord Ram in Ayodhya, was supposed to meet on Saturday.