Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal on Thursday visited the submerged areas of Kaziranga National Park through a speed motorboat via Mora Difalu River under the Bagori Range of the Park and took stock of the condition of the marooned animals and measures taken by the Park authority to ensure their protection. During his one and half hour boat ride at the flood hit areas of the Park, the Chief Minister witnessed the animals that are taking shelter at the highlands constructed by the State government at the Park. He also went to the flood affected forest camps at Gorakati, Mora Difalu and Mur Phuloni and interacted with the forest guards who are carrying out strict surveillance of the Park braving all odds to ensure protection of the marooned animals. Speaking to media persons, the Chief Minister said that the State Government built the highlands at Kaziranga National Park to ensure protection of wildlife during flood. He said that the purpose of the highlands has been successful as large numbers of animals have taken shelter there to protect themselves from flood water. Moreover, the Chief Minister said that the State has experienced third wave of flood that has affected 28 districts destroying vast tract of agricultural land and damaging private and public properties. Besides, more than 80 lives were also lost during flood so far this year, he said. The Chief Minister said that the State is simultaneously fighting COVID-19 and flood and erosion and exuded confidence to win over the crisis with cooperation of the people. Noteworthy that prior to visiting flood hit Kaziranga National Park, Chief Minister Sonowal today morning visited a flood relief camp at Rising Sun English School at Kohora. Altogether 251 inmates are taking shelter there. The Chief Minister also handed over ex-gracia cheques amounting to Rs. four lakhs each to the next of kin of Babu Kheria and Sarbeswar Doley under Bokakhat Sub-Division who died due to drowning during flood. Chief Minister Sonowal also visited the Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC) at Barjuri near Kaziranga National Park and took stock of measures taken for animals and facilities available at the center.