Kaziranga National Park is one of the most coveted wildlife vacation spots in India, covering an area of 430 square kilometers and adorned with elephant grass meadows, swampy lagoons, and thick forests that are home to more than 2200 Indian one-horned rhinos. They  make up about two-thirds of the total world population. The park was established in 1908 at the recommendation of Mary Curzon, and it is located on the edge of the Eastern Himalayan biodiversity hotspots in the Golaghat and Nagaon districts. The park was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1985. Mary Curzon went to the park to see the Indian one-horned rhinoceros but was unable to find any, prompting her to urge her husband to take action to protect the endangered species. The Kaziranga Proposed Reserve Forest, covering an area of 232 km2 (90 sq mi), was established in 1905, following a series of meetings and documentation. In addition to the iconic greater one-horned rhinoceros, the park is a breeding ground for elephants, wild water buffalo, and swamp deer. Over time, the tiger population in Kaziranga has also grown, leading to the park being declared a Tiger Reserve in 2006. The Kaziranga National Park is closed to visitors from May to October each year, but the best time to visit is from November to April. During the summer months of April to May, animals can be spotted around the water bodies, while the monsoon season from June to September brings heavy rainfall and a hot and humid climate, causing the park to be closed for safety reasons. The mild and dry winter months from November to February offer the best opportunity for spotting rhinos as the grass burns off and the background becomes clearer. Kaziranga National Park offers a plethora of tourist attractions, and among them, the jeep safari and elephant ride are the most popular. Embarking on a jeep safari is an exceptional way to discover the uncharted territories of the national park, with open gypsies that can accommodate up to six tourists at a time. This expedition through the forest is safe and allows you to witness the awe-inspiring green beasts firsthand.