On May 03, 2023 at 4 pm when the ‘Tribal Solidarity March’ organized by the All Tribal Students’ Union Manipur (ATSUM) in all the hill districts of Manipur against the Meitei’s demand for inclusion in the list of Scheduled Tribes ended peacefully, the tribal students in Churachandpur got provoked by the news that certain Meitei miscreant youths came from the neighbouring Bishnupur district and had set on fire the Anglo-Kuki War Centenary Gate at Leisang, a village located within Churachandpur along the district highway closed to the district boundary with Bishnupur. On reaching the spot, the Kuki youths found a Meitei journalist recording the burning flame of tyres at the right foot of the gate’s column. As they learned the perpetrators who came in a white bolero vehicle had returned to Bishnupur side, the pursuing Kuki youths move to the next mixed settled village, Torbung where a group of Meiteis had already gathered on the road. Amid the commotion, the Kuki youths raised the issue and tried to resolve it amicably but the Meitei youths resorted to violence and led the first assault as they began pelting stone and then torching Kuki villages in Kangvai, a village adjoining Torbung. The retaliation resulted into communal clash which spread like wildfire to Imphal valley. By nightfall, the dominant Meitei community started unleashing genocide attack upon the Kukis in the capital city Imphal where thousands of Kuki homes were vandalised, looted and set on fire including churches while the state government remain mute spectator. Targeted killing spree went on in the midst of anarchic capital city. Two Kuki young girls at Palace Gate, a stone throw away from the Chief Minister’s bungalow were handed over by their landlord into the hands of Meitei miscreants who mercilessly gang raped and then murdered them. Their dead bodies are still lying at RIMS hospital mortuary. The tone and abusive language used as well as the beastly attack on fellow human beings as are seen and heard from the viral video clips on social media are sickening and unbelievable as they appear like a nightmare worse than can be imagined, more so when all these attacks are taking place within one kilometre radius from the Chief Minister’s bungalow. The unprecedented violence of such scale could have been prevented had the CM, N. Biren Singh taken precautionary measure or at least, damage of properties and casualties could have been less disastrous had the state timely intervened. But, the state-sponsored genocide was let loosed for maximum possible catastrophe. A series of actions, notifications and press briefings of the state government put together in proper sequence reveals direct involvement of the state in the ethnic crisis with the sole motive of ensuring the majority community Meitei takeover possession of the tribal hills through three deliberated means:- (i) by getting ST recognition, (ii) by eviction of tribal villages in the garb of Reserved or Protested Forest which may later be use for settlement and (iii) by unleashing Communal violence to drive the minority tribals out of their land. Meitei’s demand for ST recognition The single-judge Bench of the High Court vide its order dated 14.04.2023 directed the state government to submit its recommendation after considering the case of the petitioners, “preferably within four weeks” of receipt of the order. The tribal groups, opposed the court’s direction because granting ST status to the Meiteis who are more prosperous and socially more privileged is clearly a ploy to grab the tribal’s land in the hills. Initially the demand was kept a secretive but now, the Meiteis started openly questioning why they should not be allowed to settle in the tribal hills. This ST demand, out of covet for tribal land, has sparked off the current violence. Eviction in the garb of RF/PF With the sole aim to evict the tribal residents living in the heart of their hometown, Churachandpur, the chief minister proposed to carry out survey on the RF, PF, wetland preservation and wildlife sanctuary while simultaneously planning to complete cancellation of ‘pattas’ and ‘jabamandis’ on April 30, 2023. Earlier, the chief minister has also issued show caused notices for the eviction of more than 200 villages in Kangpoki districts. The motive is to intimidate the Kukis and suppress their moral down enough that they may accept his(CM) terms even at their peril. When they realized that the government’s systematic oppress has no end, the Kuki tribals decided to launch a non-cooperation movement against the Chief Minister, N. Biren Singh that he had to cancel his visit to Churachandpur district, where he was scheduled to address a public gathering at Sadbhavna Mandap in New Lamka Town and inaugurate an open gym at the PT Sports Complex on 28th April, 2023 as the people who were angry with his proposal to carry out survey in Churachandpur town had set ablaze the venue, burned chairs, and damaged other materials. Unleashing Communal Violence As per their facebook post on 28th Octorber, 2022, Arambal Tenggol also claims to have Unit 1 to 9 of which Unit-8(outstation unit) is composed of those who have taken the oath but are staying outside the state of Manipur while Unit-9 or RAT(Reserved Arambai Tenggol) is formed by the Meitei youths serving in defence and para-military forces of the central government and those employed in the state forces. The oath taking ceremonies after completing training are held at Sanakonung (Palace Compound) led by the titular king of Manipur and Raja Sabha MP, Sanajaoba Leishemba who is said to be the militia’s chairman as well. Having prepared the Arambai Tenggol ready for combat, the chief minister, N Biren Singh began to publicly insult the Kukis through his official facebook post, press statements, official orders, promulgation, etc, at times even name calling or branding the Kukis as illegal immigrants. The Kuki youths who refuted or made negative comment about his post were either threatened, arrested or both. On the other hand, the Meitei radical groups were left unrestraint to freely make all sorts of communal remarks against the Kukis. As the Kukis remained unprovoked in spite of the chief minister’s action stated above, the well known balanced Meiteis individuals had also begun followed suit in using the term ‘illegal immigrants’ to refer to the Kukis almost in every TV discussion without any restraint or responsibility. One prevalent false narrative is that the population of Kukis in Manipur was just 1% in 1901 but it is now 29% the figures of which are totally fabricated. Base on this fabricated statistics, the Meiteis demand for implementation of NRC in Manipur taking 1951 as the base year. Even if 1951 is fixed as the base year for NRC, it may be noted that in the year 1951 the State was divided into 3 Plains and 5 Hills Subdivisions of which Sadar sub-division which is now Kangpokpi was recorded as having the highest population of 2,70,972 and Thoubal sub-division recorded with 1,23,754 population was the second largest. Today, Thoubal has 6 MLA’s whereas Kangpokpi has only 3 MLA’s. This alone stands proof that there is no any abnormal growth of Kuki population as alleged. There is also another radical group called Meitei Leepun who along with other Meitei CSO’s had Starting from mid 2021, the state government had selectively collected all license arms though District Magistrates in the Kuki dominated districts with the warning that those who failed to deposit would face cancellation of their license. In contrast, it has now come to light that the Arambai Tenggols led Meitei miscreants had looted about 4000 sophisticated weapons from the state armory along with 5 lakh rounds of ammunitions with the tacit understanding of the state government. These arms were used in attacking and burning down of Kuki villages. Immediate Cause Though they have file an appeal before the High Court and the High Court has also directed the state government submit its recommendation for inclusion of the Meiteis in the lists of ST, the Meiteis themselves know well that their legal pursuit for ST status is like chasing the wind. They therefore have no patience to wait for the final result and thus, switched over to the path of violence to achieve their target of settling in the tribal hills. In short, the present violent situation is what the Chief Minister had been eagerly waiting for since the past many years particularly after his party got absolute majority in the March 2022 Assembly Election. Had it been a case of mere misunderstanding between two groups in which he is not directly involved, he would have used all the state’s security forces to quell the situation. Even the army and para-military forces already there in the state are sufficient to quell the situation. No extra security forces are required from outside the state. The fact is that he monitors, directs and oversees to make sure that his Meitei community completely reigns over the Kukis that the latter would forever remain submissive and servitude to the former. He wants to inflict the Kukis with the most devastating effect that the Kukis may not rise again. Irrational as it may sound, the Meiteis with the population of 57% having 40 MLA’s feel insecure because the Kuki with the population of 18% have 10 MLA’s. It’s a case of ‘Might is Right’ like the story of ‘The Wolf and The Lamb” where the wolf blamed a lamb down-stream for making the water muddy. Why Nagas are not targeted? What the Meiteis want besides land? There is neither bifurcated data of expenditure for the valley and the hills made public after the financial year 2021-22, nor any data before 2017-18. However, the above four year’s figure is indicative of the financial injustice done to the hill districts of Manipur for over a century now. At present, what the Kukis have saved out of their shares from the less than 2% they shared with Nagas has also been, looted, vandalized and burned down to ashes by the state sponsored riots. First, the Kukis have been deprived of their fair share and now, their meager savings have also been looted in addition to rendering them homeless. What is the solution?