In a recent update, the Chief Secretary of Assam Kumar Sanjay Krishna informed on Friday that Kamrup Metro and Kamrup districts would be treated as one district for the movement of individuals. The official order further stated movement of all goods shall continue uninterrupted. The Deputy Commissioner of Police has informed on Friday evening that the Personal Security Officer (PSO) of DCP Traffic Mukut Bania has been suspended with immediate effect in connection to the beating of a differently-abled minor boy on Thursday at Bharalu in Guwahati city. A total lockdown will be imposed at Dimapur district of Nagaland from July 26 to August 2, declared the Dimapur District Task Force led by Deputy Commissioner Dimapur Anoop Kinchi, while, the Kohima District Task Force has imposed a total lockdown in Kohima from July 25 to July 31. In a major update, Meghalaya government on Friday has decided to re-impose lockdown in the Shillong Agglomeration from midnight of July 26 till midnight of July 29. President Ram Nath Kovind and Assam chief minister Sarbananda Sonowal discussed several crises pertaining to the state on Friday. The president over a telephone conversation with the CM took stock of the current flood situation, landslides, coronavirus pandemic, Baghjan well-capping operation and African swine fever. Prince William, Duke of Cambridge expressed concern over the devastating flood in Kaziranga National Park and wrote a letter to the Director of the Park saying that he is really heartbroken over the death of so many animals due to flood. The letter reads as "Catherine and I were heartbroken to hear about the appalling devastation to Kaziranga National Park and its precious wildlife caused by the very heavy monsoon flooding." Over 44 percent of the 984 prisoners in the Guwahati Central Jail, including peasant leader Akhil Gogoi and student activist Sharjeel Imam, have tested positive for COVID-19, informed a senior official. The Gauhati High Court has ordered the Assam government to provide the best treatment to prisoners who have tested positive for COVID-19 after suo moto cognizance of the rising number of cases inside the jails. The expert teams who are working at Baghjan oil well to douse the flame at oil well no 5 of Oil India Limited in Tinsukia district are preparing for the final round-up for well-capping. A Blow Out Preventer (BOP) has been kept ready for installation at the oil well site. The BOP will control the flame and gas emission from the blow out site. Experts expected that the well-capping operation will come to an end by Saturday (July 25). The Uttarakhand Devasthanam Board on Friday issued a revised standard operating procedure (SOP) allowing asymptomatic persons from outside the state to undertake the Chardham Yatra but with certain conditions. A group of Indians held a rally in Washington DC, demanding immigration reforms to benefit those who are legal immigrants in the country. A key demand of the group was that the green card backlog must be cleared as opposed to the current wait time, that could run into decades for employment-based green cards for Indians. For the third day in a row, the number of COVID-19 recoveries in a 24-hour span saw another record high, with 34,602 patients having recuperated pushing the recovery rate to 63.45 per cent, the Union health ministry said on Friday. The case fatality rate has further declined to 2.38 per cent, it said. Jammu and Kashmir's Director General of Police (DGP) Dilbag Singh on Friday said that ceasefire violations committed by Pakistan in the Union Territory have increased by 50-60 per cent as compared to last year."There was an increase of 70 per cent in incidents of ceasefire violations in 2019 in comparison to 2018. If we compare with the last year, there is an increase of 50-60 per cent. Pakistan and its agencies aim to send more terrorists while they violate ceasefire," Mr. Singh told. The United States accused Russia of test-firing an anti-satellite weapon in space, warning that the threat against Washington's systems was "real, serious and increasing." US Space Command said it "has evidence" that Moscow "conducted a non-destructive test of a space-based anti-satellite weapon" on July 15. The 2020-21 Premier League season will begin on September 12 and conclude on May 23, the English top-flight announced on Friday. The English Football League confirmed the Championship, League One and League Two will also start the same weekend. The Indian women's T20 World Cup team begins their hunt for elusive ICC prize with one of the toughest matches of their campaign when they take on hosts Australia in the first match in Sydney on Friday.