Satish Choudhary, a resident of Satpakhali locality in Assam's Kamrup district on Friday won the 'Dinanath Pandey Smart Idea Innovation Award, 2024', for the innovation of a solar eri spinning machine. The award was conferred on Choudhary at the Regional Science Centre in Guwahati's Khanapara. This award was given to the best innovator among the participants at the Innovation Festival which was organised by North East Zone Headquarters of the National Council of Science Museums in association with National Innovative Foundation (NIF) on February 22 and 23 at the Regional Science Centre. Over 50 participants across the northeastern states displayed their innovative ideas in the innovation festival. Notably, Satish Choudhary won the award for his solar-operated portable eri spinning machine named ‘Saraswati’ inspired by his mother. He has attempted to bring a new life to the traditional eri spinning culture of the region with his innovation. His portable eri silk spinning machine is compact, smooth in operation and works on a battery recharged by a solar panel. It has many ergonomic features including low noise, speed control for beginners to learn or experts to ace, and an attractive design. It requires no lubrication due to the use of a plastic gear set. The award was instituted by the family of Dinanath Pandey who was a master innovator and tried to change the way of life by his innovations. The innovation festival has been providing a common platform since 2015 to the people of all the states in the northeast region working in different fields like innovators, artists, performers, crafters and science demonstrators among others showcasing their creativity. Sailen Pandey, son of Dinanath Pandey while speaking at the occasion said that the family wanted to carry forward their father’s legacy. Earlier on Thursday, the innovation festival was inaugurated by Professor Smriti Kumar Sinha, Vice Chancellor of Pragjyotishpur University; Rajdeep Bailung Baruah, Editor-in-Chief of ND24 and Pintu Hati of NIF. Meghalaya’s cab driver Gautam Gurung won the Dinanath Pandey Smart Idea Innovation Award last year. Gurung was awarded for his innovation ‘Automatic Car Sanitizer’ model.