Actor-singer couple Priyanka Chopra and Nick Jonas have made donations towards Assam flood relief measures and have asked their fans to do the same. Taking to social media, they shared a couple of organizations that one can make donations to. "While we are all still dealing with the effects of the global pandemic, the Indian state of Assam has been grappling with another major crisis. It has been devastated by floods triggered by heavy monsoon showers affecting the lives of millions. The impact to life and land/property is unimaginable. The rapidly rising water level has also flooded the Kaziranga National Park, one of the finest wildlife sanctuaries in the world," wrote Priyanka in a tweet. "They need our attention and support. I'm sharing details of a few credible organizations that are doing some good work on the ground in Assam, and Nick and I have made a donation to each. Let us support them so they can continue to help those in need. #Assamfloods #PrayForAssam #AssamNeedsHelp @PRIYANKACHOPRA," she added. #Assamfloods#PrayForAssam #AssamNeedsHelp

You can make a donation here:
Rapid Response:https://t.co/4XD4N0vh1f 

Action Aid: https://t.co/nV858gOGv9 pic.twitter.com/Sn1CoyllYc Nick also shared the same message on his social media accounts. They shared details of Action Aid and Rapid Response, two organisations working towards flood relief. Floods have wreaked havoc in Assam's various districts for the fourth time this year. The State Disaster Management Authority (SDMA) said that the death toll has reached 102. A total of 2,543 villages are reeling from the effects of rising waters of Brahmaputra, among its other tributaries, which have affected 1.22 lakh hectares of crop. Priyanka is a brand ambassador of Assam and has featured in several initiatives to support tourism in the state. Earlier, Priyanka and Nick also made donations to the coronavirus relief funds and shared links to all the Indian, American, and global charities that they had donated to. They made donations to the Prime Minister's relief fund and also the Chief Minister's relief fund.