Sunrisers Hyderabad beats Royal Challengers Bangalore by 6 wickets in the IPL match on Friday. In what may be termed as a breakthrough in terms of transportation, Assam State Transport Corporation (ASTC) on Friday has inducted 20 premium Mercedez-Benz buses in the state. According to an official statement, the inducted buses will operate between LGBI Airport, Guwahati and Silchar, Dibrugarh & Jorhat respectively. New day services have also been started between Dhubri – Guwahati, Lakhimpur – Tezpur routes and in the hilly regions of Haflong and Diphu to Hojai. The Gauhati High Court on Friday has taken up the plea seeking bail of Krishak Mukti Sangram Samiti (KMSS) chief Akhil Gogoi under the Unlawful Activities Prevention Act (UAPA). The court is scheduled for the next hearing on November 19. Senior advocate Huzefa Ahmadi presented that the witness's statement was not enough to file a case under the UAPA against Akhil. The Assam Government has rejected the order of the National Green Tribunal (NGT) to ban firecrackers in Diwali amid the coronavirus pandemic and to control the pollution level. A bench headed by the chairperson of the National Green Tribunal (NGT) Justice Adarsh Kumar Goel on Wednesday sent notices to 18 states and union territories including Assam, Nagaland and Meghalaya to expand the scope of hearing cases on pollution by firecrackers during Diwali. Assam's Pobitora Wildlife Sanctuary, which is known for its dense population of Indian Rhinos, is set to reopen on November 10 after almost seven months. The wildlife sanctuary on the southern bank of Brahmaputra river was closed since March due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the monsoon season. According to sources, animals, trees, forest camps and various infrastructure in Pobitora were seriously affected due to floods this year which had ravaged the state. The inflow of foreign tourists was also very low during January and February this year due to deadly protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) in December 2019. The Assam Government has formed a Task Force for 10 days to control the price rise of essential commodities including onion and potato, informed State Food and Civil Supplies Minister Phani Bhusan Choudhury. Choudhury informed that the task force will be formed with the officials of Civil Supplies department, GMC, Agriculture department, police administration and district administration officials. "The Task Force will keep an eye on the price of onion which will be sold at Rs. 50 per kg in wholesale rate. The customers will be able to buy onions at Rs. 56/57 per kg. The government will also fix the price of vegetables in the Pamohi market from today and the unregistered markets will also have to follow the same price list for vegetables," the Minister added. After SI exam scam to JEE scam, now comes to light the scholarship scam that stretches far and wide from Ranchi in Jharkhand to Saharsa in Bihar to Nazira in Assam. According to a data on the National Scholarship Portal (NSP), Kendriya Vidyalaya, Nazira is listed under six districts n Bihar for the Center's pre-Matric scholarships for poor minority students but the fact is that the school is just one which is situated in Assam's Sivasagar district. Assam Minister Himanta Biswa Sarma on Thursday said that the National Register of Citizens (NRC) published in August 2019 is fundamentally wrong and a new exercise will start after the elections with the permission of the Supreme Court. Speaking to media, Sarma said that the allegation that the former NRC Coordinator Prateek Hajela who was transferred to Madhya Pradesh last year by the top court was instrumental in preparing a fundamentally wrong NRC. The Gauhati High Court (GHC) has ordered to declare the election date of the Bodoland Territorial Region (BTR) by November 20. The Election Commission has been asked to declare the dates within November 20. The order was issued based on a PIL seeking to conduct the BTC election. The court also instructed to issue election notification. The Bombay High Court on Friday heard the interim bail plea of Republic TV editor Arnab Goswami in an abetment to suicide case dating back to 2018 and said the hearing will be continued on Saturday noon (November 7) at a special session. Goswami hence will have to spend the third night in judicial custody for his alleged abetment to suicide of an interior designer Anvay Naik in 2018. A total of 84 schools in Uttarakhand have been closed for five days after 80 of its teachers tested positive for coronavirus. While schools in the state were reopened on November 2, the teachers who are working in schools of Khirsu, Pauri, Kot, Pabo and Kaljikhal blocks of Pauri district, detected positive for COVID-19 on Thursday (November 5). Union Home Minister Amit Shah, during a speech in West Bengal on Friday, said that the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) will be implemented across the nation once the pandemic situation is firmly under control. Shah was on a two-day tour of West Bengal where assembly election will be held early next year. With 73.5%, the highest proportion of asymptomatic cases was reported among the children below the age of 12, a data of All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) said. The report said that the proportion decreased linearly with age, with only 38.4% of the cases among those above the age of 80 being asymptomatic. Dr. Urvashi Singh, Professor, Department of Microbiology said, "This is the data from our centre. The relevance comes in when we question the validity of an RT PCR test. As there are no symptoms in many of the patients, we do not come to know on which day we are sampling them." US President Donald Trump launched an assault on the country's democratic process from the White House on Thursday, falsely claiming the election was being 'stolen' from him as Democratic Party Joe Biden nears victory. Trump said, "This is a case where they are trying to steal an election." Assam detected 335 active coronavirus cases out of 25883 tests conducted on Friday while 926 cured patients were discharged. The recovery rate of the state has further improved to 96.15 %. With new discharges reported, the active cases in the state have further reduced to 7067.