Guwahati: Construction activities on National Highway-37 (now NH-715) in the Kaziranga National Park & Tiger Reserve (KNPTR) have been allegedly impeding animal movement within the park during this monsoon season. 
These activities are in violation of the conditions set by the Standing Committee of National Board for Wildlife (NBWL), according to RTI and environment activist Rohit Choudhury, who wrote to Union forest and environment minister Bhupender Yadav, urging him to intervene and stop the ongoing construction as it may severely hamper wildlife movement towards safer locations during floods.
Choudhury claimed the state govt has permitted construction and obstruction in multiple wildlife corridors in Kaziranga. Through an RTI reply dated June 13 from the Wildlife Wing of MOEFCC, Choudhury discovered that the 78th meeting of the SCNBW, held on February 22 under the chairmanship of the Union forest minister, approved the proposal for “Widening and Improvement of Existing Carriageway to 4 Lane Configuration from Kaliabor to Numaligarh section of NH-37 (New NH-715) in the state of Assam” subject to specific conditions. One of the conditions given to NHAI was to refrain from constructing anything on the animal corridors between June and September, the period when floods hit Assam and inundate vast parts of Kaziranga.
In his letter, Choudhury requested disciplinary action against some senior officials of the state forest department for allegedly failing to halt activities detrimental to wildlife being carried out in violation of the conditions of approval. He stated, “The Public Works Department (National Highway) of Government of Assam damaged the Haldhibari corridor by converting the metal-based road into an RCC one, widening the NH-37 by 6-7 feet on average on each side, and gravelling the road-margins thereby destroying the grass cover which is extensively used by herbivores for foraging and shelter during the flood season.” 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoHaldhibari wildlife corridor is one of the most active corridors, used 24X7 by the park’s wildlife, and its importance was highlighted by the Assam chief minister in his post on X, dated August 8, 2023, by uploading a video of a Royal Bengal Tiger crossing the corridor.
Furthermore, Choudhury mentioned that the state govt has allowed the installation of fender barriers and metal cable fencing on concrete and metal posts in the Burapahar area, along with laying paver-blocks on roadsides and installing solar flood lights in the wildlife corridors at Burapahar and elsewhere. This, he said, is another violation of SCNBW, which stood for no adverse impact on wild animals and their habitat. The speed-sensing camera equipped with Automatic Number Plate Recognizing (ANPR) Radar, installed at Maloni (opposite Burapahar Tea Estate) in the Hatidandi/Kanchanjuri Corridor in 2017 pursuant to the orders of NGT, had mysteriously gone missing in 2021 and was never re-installed. This has turned the corridor into a death trap for wildlife due to speeding vehicles, according to Choudhury.