Bhopal: The frequent sightings of big cats in Bhopal raise a worrying question: Is this a warning sign of environmental imbalance? 
TOI talked to wildlife experts and environmentalists to find out why these apex predators are venturing out of the forest area. They pointed out the increased human activities, encroachment, and onset of summer as the underlying reason.
The Kerwa and Kaliasot areas have been identified as tiger movement areas for decades, but an increase in the human activities in the forest areas on the city outskirts has disturbed the natural habitat of these wild animals.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoAs of now, no major incident of human-wildlife conflict has been reported, but there is a need to restrict human encroachment in the tiger movement areas, especially at night, experts said.
On Wednesday night, a leopard was run over by a train in Amoni Forest beat of Samardha forest range. Two other big cats were also spotted in the city last month. A video of a tiger roaming in front of a private university gate in Ratibad locality went viral on social media on April 19. Forest officials confirmed the tiger movement and said that tigress T-123 and its four cubs reside in the surrounding forests. On April 15, a leopard allegedly strayed into the Bhoj University Campus in Chunabhatti area.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoEnvironmentalist Rashid Noor Khan said that the frequent movement of big cats including tiger and leopard in the area surrounding Kerwa and Kaliasot regions shows that these are forest areas and should be conserved. These areas have been traditionally natural habitats of tigers. Even the ministry of environment and forest in their report states these areas as deemed forest. Not only tigers and leopards, but many other species of wild animals reside in these woods.
“Despite this, private farmhouses are being developed in interior areas of the forest. Late night parties in these farmhouses cause noise pollution. Permissions to develop farmhouses and roads are given in tiger movement areas without any restrictions. Sewage from posh residential colonies is directly flowed here. Many slum areas from Kolar have illegally encroached the area. Despite complaints, no action has been taken,” Khan said.
Khan points out that Bhopal is the only city where wild tigers have been seen roaming in the municipal limits. Kerwa and Kaliasot forest areas have become favourable breeding grounds for tigers, but administration is least concerned with restricting human activities in forest areas, Khan said, adding that movement on Amarnath Colony-Kaliasot Road should be restricted at night.
Retired senior forest officer Sudesh Waghmare said that one of the major reasons for wild animals straying into human populated areas, especially in summer, may be linked to search for water. 
He said that not only the Kerwa- Kaliasot Forest area, but even the Kolar Road Forest area has been affected by human population. New colonies have been developed in these areas, even beyond Bairagarh Chichli, Gol Gaon and Kala Pani village in Kolar.
“The forest areas of Kerwa, Kaliasot, Kathotia, Kolar Dam Road, Delabadi, Ratapani and Hoshangabad are all connected, and these wild animals migrate through this corridor. It is normal for tigers to cover 40-50 km in search of food and water,” Waghmare said.
Commenting on how human-wildlife conflicts can be avoided, Waghmare said that human interventions should be minimised in these forest areas around the city.