NAINITAL: In Nainital's GB Pant High-Altitude Zoo, the wildlife population has steadily declined over the past four years, from 231 to 199. This decrease has raised concerns about the future of the zoo's inhabitants. 
A significant contributing factor to this decline is the lack of exchange programmes, bringing in animals from other states during this period.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoAdditionally, the ageing of existing wildlife poses a potential threat to further diminishing their numbers in the coming years. According to data provided by the zoo authorities, several species are facing challenges due to a lack of suitable breeding pairs or individuals. These include two Himalayan Monals, an 8-year-old male and a 12-year-old female. The birds have not bred since 2015. Additionally, there is only one male Tibetan wolf remaining, and no female wolves. Similarly, two female Royal Bengal Tigers are without a male counterpart. The zoo houses only one male markhor and one female Spotted Deer without a male deer. 
The situation is similar for other species, including a male Edward Pheasant, two male Himalayan Palm Civets, a female Blue and Golden Macaw, and a male peafowl, all of which lack suitable partners. Except for the Royal Bengal Tiger, Himalayan Common Civet, Sabar, Edwards Pheasant, Blue and Gold Macaw, Black Kite, Cockatiel, and Hill Partridge, all other animals and birds in the zoo have been adopted.
Anuj Kandpal, a biologist at the zoo, highlighted the critical status of species such as the Edward Pheasant and Tibetan wolf, which can only be bolstered via international exchanges. "There is only one Tibetan wolf at Darjeeling zoo, which is also a male, matching the situation at Nainital zoo. Efforts are ongoing to secure a Monal pair, the state bird of Uttarakhand, although acquiring rescued Monals from the wild is challenging, as no approved rescue centres are available, and their sensitive nature makes long-distance transportation risky."