CHANDIGARH: In a major embarrassment to the Punjab government, the Chandigarh bench of the Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT) has set-aside the transfer order of a senior woman IFS officer against an ex-cadre post terming the decision of the state authorities to be “illegal and passed with malice”.
"The Financial Commissioner and Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (HoFF), department of Forest and Wildlife Preservation Punjab, have failed to give any plausible explanation regarding non-applicability of relevant rules in issuance of impugned order which shows that the due procedure under the relevant rules has not been followed in issuance of the impugned order.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoTherefore, the transfer order dated April 12 is illegal and arbitrary. The respondents have done injustice to the applicant in issuance of the impugned transfer order in the breach of the Rules,” the CAT has held in its detailed orders released on Tuesday.
Suresh Kumar Batra, judicial member of CAT, Chandigarh has passed these orders while hearing a plea filed by Monika Devi Yadav, an IFS officer of 2013 batch posted in Punjab.
She had approached the HC seeking directions to quash the transfer order dated April 12 whereby she was transferred against the post of General Manager (Central) Punjab State Forest Development Corporation Limited (PSFDC) with the remarks “due to departmental proceedings pending against the officer”.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoFurther direction was sought to declare the decision as illegal and arbitrary in transferring the applicant by way of deputation to another corporation/entity, without her consent and against an ex-cadre post.
She was ordered to be transferred after issuance of show cause notice by the department in connection with a contempt matter pending before the Punjab and Haryana high court regarding cutting of some trees in Sangrur district. She was posted as divisional forest officer (DFO) Sangrur at the time of her transfer.
After hearing the matter, the CAT observed that the departmental proceeding can be stated to have been initiated, only if a formal charge sheet has been issued to the delinquent officer to explain his conduct. It was also observed that in the instant case, mere a show cause notice dated March 14 was issued to the applicant to which she had already filed a detailed reply on April 13, which is yet to be considered by the competent authority. 
“It is evident that the competent authority by way of issuance of show cause notice has called for the applicant to file reply within a period of seven days from the
receipt of show cause notice, failing which, it has been observed that the disciplinary proceedings will be initiated against the applicant as per Rules. From the perusal of material available on record, it is established that no charge sheet was drawn by the competent authority at the time of issuance of impugned order dated April 12. Therefore, the grounds of pendency of departmental proceeding against the applicant, taken by the respondents for issuance of transfer order of the applicant is illegal and wrong,” the tribunal has held while quashing the transfer orders.