Bhubaneswar: Like in most human-animal conflicts, humans are the root of what’s happening in Odisha’s Bhitarkanika National Park, one of India’s largest mangrove ecosystems.
Unusually large saltwater crocodiles, measuring as long as 23 feet (the normal maximum length for adult males is just under 17 feet), and a crocodile population — around 1,800 — that’s grown too big for the habitat, are a combination guaranteed to force some of these reptiles venture as far as 100 km from their ‘home’, looking for food.Six people in the Kendrapara district have died over the past six months and the count since 2013 is 50, per official data.

The unsustainably large number of crocodiles, given the habitat at Bhitarkanika, and, for humans, the intimidatingly large size of some of them, are thanks to a conservation project that paid little attention to the national park’s carrying capacity.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteBC Chaudhury, a wildlife expert and retired scientist of Wildlife Institute of India, says: “With too many of them packed in a small space, there seems to be increased competition among males for mating partners and heightened competitions for food…that’s why they may be spreading out and becoming more aggressive.”
The project to breed crocodiles started in 1975 to preserve three species of crocodiles, Gharial (Gavialis gangeticus) in Mahanadi Gorge in Satkosia tiger reserve, Mugger (Crocodylus palustris) in Similipal and saltwater crocodile (Crocodylus porosus) in Bhitarkanika .
Officially, the breeding was stopped in 1992, when the crocodile population increased substantially. But — and this is the problem — forest department officials keep releasing saltwater crocodiles, especially eggs hatched for research.
For example, in August 2022, forest officials had released 38 young salt-water crocodiles into the river near Karandiapatana village outside the park. The young crocs had grown up in the hatchery and rearing complex at Dangamal, which is inside the national park.
Experts say the number of crocodiles in Bhitarkanika is a matter of concern. Chaudhury says, “From personal experience I can say there is a big rise in their number (1,192 in 2000 to 1,793 this year, per official census)…this is evident from the greater frequency of their sighting during my multiple visits to the national park”. He suggests there should be a thorough review.
Sudhakar Kar, a retired senior scientist, (wildlife) of Odisha Forest department, who has done extensive research on crocodiles, says of the 1,793 crocodiles in Bhitarkanika, around 345 are adults and 166 are sub-adults, and all are capable of attacking people.
Senior government officials told TOI a commission of wildlife experts will be set up to study the problem. They also said locals are being asked not to use riverbanks that are not barricaded.
Locals are not reassured. The big crocs will keep venturing out of their relatively small habitat.