Mangaluru: A veterinarian risked his life to save a leopard trapped in a 25ft well in Belvai on Saturday.
Dr Yashaswi Naravi, a veterinarian from Chitte Pili Rescue Centre, and also a consultant wildlife veterinarian for the forest department, sat inside a cage to lower himself into a well, after he was alerted to a distressed male leopard trapped in a well.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoHe said, “The day had been incredibly busy; we conducted surgery on a python, treated an olive ridley sea turtle, and just as I was about to call it a day, the forest department called for my assistance in a leopard rescue operation. Without hesitation, I drove to Belvai, about 40km from here. Upon arrival, I found out that the leopard aged about four years, weighing about 50kg, had fallen into a small well. The department had been attempting to rescue it for a day, but their efforts were in vain. It was decided that darting the animal was the safest option. According to locals, the leopard had wandered into a nearby house, grabbed a chicken, and in its haste to retreat, accidentally tumbled into the well.” 
The team of experts on site, planned to lower a cage into the well, and Dr Yashaswi volunteered to sit inside. Given the late evening hour (around 8.30pm), and the leopard’s position directly above the smaller ring inside the well, darting the animal from above seemed challenging. 
“Upon studying the situation, I agreed to be caged to ensure the darting procedure could be executed safely and effectively. Sitting inside the cage, I carefully aimed the blowpipe and successfully darted the leopard. Once sedated, the leopard was shifted to the cage. Following this, the department of fire and emergency personnel swiftly installed a ladder for my ascent. Drawing from our previous successful rescue, we opted to replicate the method, which proved successful,” he said. 
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe leopard, after observation, was released into the wild on Sunday night. Last year, Dr Meghana Pemmaiah, his wife, undertook a similar rescue operation to save a year-old female leopard that had also fallen into a well, at Niddodi near Kateel.
The team was led by DCF Anthony S Mariyappa included RFO Dinesh, DyRFOs Kavya, Ashwith Gatti, Manjunath Ganiga and Raghavendra Shetty and beat officers Shankar and Diwakar. In addition, the staff from the fire and emergency services department and Dr Sameeksha Reddy and Praveen Kumar assisted. 
Injured olive ridley sea 
turtle dies
The team provided medical care to an olive ridley sea turtle with a flipper injury caused by a ghost net. Weighing approximately 13kg, the turtle was found in Surathkal. Due to the severity of the injury, it was necessary to amputate the affected flipper. The surgery was successfully performed on the same day. However, the turtle passed away on Monday, due to other health complications.