MEERUT: IN welcome news, data on the latest census of Gangetic dolphins in the Hastinapur Wildlife Sanctuary released by the UP forest department on Friday revealed that 50 dolphins now thrive in river Ganga, up from 41 in the last census in 2020.
The census was conducted in the Hastinapur Wildlife Sanctuary, now rechristened State Swamp Deer Wildlife Sanctuary, and the adjacent Ramsar site area.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Lead, Ganga Dolphin Conservation (WWF India), Shahnawaz Khan, said, "Compared to the 2020 census in which we saw four calves, this time we witnessed five which was heartening to watch after all the hard work involved in their conservation."
‘Increased level of awareness among locals resulted in growth of dolphin population ’
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe ‘tandem boat survey’ method was used to conduct the census. Khan added: “In this method, the surveyors are usually on two inflated boats that move in tandem in order to count the dolphins.” The 221-km stretch that includes the sanctuary part (from Bijnor Barrage to Garh Mukteshwar) and the world’s only Gangetic Dolphin Ramsar site (from Garh Mukteshwar to Narora Barrage) is the only dolphin habitat in western Uttar Pradesh region. The conservation began in 2012 in a joint effort by UP forest division and WWF India. 
Elaborating, chief conservator of forests (Meerut division), NK Janu, told TOI: “The habitat, particularly the depth of the pools, changes post-monsoon every year. The survey’s preliminary findings show that this year more deep pools were recorded in the lower stretch of the river as compared to 2020. These deep pools support the dolphin population.” He added: “The increased level of awareness among local communities in recent years has also resulted in less disturbance, which perhaps contributed to this dolphin population growth in the Upper Ganga Ramsar site.” 
Senior coordinator at Aquatic Biodiversity, WWF India, Sanjeev Yadav, said, “This year, the dolphin sightings were, more-or-less, the same in the sanctuary area – 32. But the Ramsar site witnessed 18 dolphins as compared to 10 in the 2020 census.” Notably, there has been a steady rise in the dolphin number ever since the project of conservation began in 2012. “The first census took place in 2015 and at that time the number was 22. We have seen a steady rise since then,” Yadav pointed out.