Nagpur: In good news for wildlife buffs, Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve (TATR) has recorded increase in its tiger population, from the minimum 87 in 2022 to 93 in 2023.
As per the 2023 Phase IV survey, which involved monitoring of tiger and prey on annual basis at the tiger reserve level, TATR has recorded 44 male and 47 female tigers, while gender of two individuals could not be identified.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo

Tadoba officials conducted the exercise independently for 55 days between March and May 2023 in core (625 sq km) and buffer (1,127 sq km) areas in two phases. The report says 9 lakh pictures were captured by 1,250 cameras.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreOver 1.44 lakh images featured species including chital, mongoose, leopard, tiger, honey badger, pangolin and others. From the total 625 locations, 4,855 images of tigers were captured at 502 locations, while 389 locations captured 2,174 images of leopards.
As per the All India Tiger Estimation-2022, which is conducted every four years by the National Tiger Conservation Authority and Wildlife Institute of India, Maharashtra, is estimated to have 444 tigers.
From 15 tigers in 2010 to 93 in 2023, TATR and its buffer has demonstrated an over six-fold increase in tiger count. 
Conservator of forest (CF) and field director Dr Jitendra Ramgaonkar said, “Though survey shows marginal rise, our tiger numbers are mostly stable. The figure of 93 is the optimum number. There is an increase in the area covered from 321 sq km in 2010 to over 1,300 sq km in the buffer. The stability of figures is because the numbers have reached a saturation point due to carrying capacity.”
Dr Ramgaonkar added, “The increase in number of tigers poses a big challenge. Due to habitat development, voluntary relocation of villages from the park and better conservation management, we have managed to keep the tiger population stable.”
TATR deputy director (core) Nandkishore Kale said, “Some tigers from core are knocked out by stronger tigers. These tigers settle in the buffer, pushing those in the buffer to adjoining territorial areas. Tigers even die in territorial fights and also cause man-animal conflict. To address the problem, conservation translocation of tigers is a solution.” 
Gadchiroli honorary wildlife warden Uday Patel says, “Forest officials may be happy with the steady rise in tigers, but the situation is alarming. It is imperative to focus on habitat degradation, anthropogenic pressure, and wild prey populations in areas surrounding Tadoba and its landscape, as these are key factors dictating conflict outside PAs.”
Eco-Pro president Bandu Dhotre says the state should implement the Wildlife Action Plan to set things right. The plan, approved three years ago, is only on paper. “The management of Kanhargaon and Ghodazari sanctuaries in Chandrapur district should also be handed over to Tadoba if man-conflict is to be curbed and tigers are to be saved.”