AHMEDABAD: Flights taking off from or landing at Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel International (SVPI) airport in Ahmedabad are at a high risk of suffering bird or animal strikes. The city airport reported 81 wildlife strike incidents in the first ten months of 2023 - the second highest number for any airport in India after Delhi (169). 

The number of bird strikes at SVPI has in just 10 months increased by 107.6% from the 39 incidents in all of 2022, according to data from the ministry of civil aviation.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe number of bird strike incidents was 19 for Surat airport and seven each in Vadodara and Rajkot. 
"Analysis of wildlife strike data shows that most strikes occur during the landing and take-off phases. The DGCA has issued regulations and guidelines for management of potential wildlife hazards at licensed airports. Rule 91 of The Aircraft Rules 1937 prohibits dumping of waste and slaughtering of animals that may attract wildlife within 10km of the aerodrome reference point," a statement from the ministry said. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoAvian strikes increase during the monsoon when proliferation of insects is greater, which draws scavenging birds, sources said. The spells of unseasonal rain this year and resultant changes in humidity levels may also have caused the increase in bird strikes. 
An email questionnaire sent to the SVPI airport operator went unanswered. 
Pigeon fanciers also race the birds in areas such as Asarwa, Meghaninagar, Sardarnagar and Kubernagar, which are close to the airport. This is a cause of concern for the airport operator. The issue has been discussed during airport environment committee meetings, but no concrete conclusion has been reached thus far. 
Last year, the directorate general of civil aviation (DGCA) issued a circular urging airports to identify gaps and ensure strict implementation of the plan for wildlife hazard management in and near aerodromes. Compliance with regulations and guidance on wildlife hazard management is monitored through annual surveillance inspections. 
The Civil Aviation Requirement mandates that the aerodrome operator get wildlife hazards evaluated by competent personnel and action be taken to decrease the risk to aircraft operations by adopting measures to minimize the likelihood of collisions between wildlife and aircraft. 
The airport operator is also getting help from local authorities to reduce activities that attract birds to the flight approach path.