Anant Ambani and Radhika Merchant's three-day pre-wedding celebrations kicked off with excitement, including Rihanna's performance and a cool drone show. Day 2 might not be as flashy, but it's still going to be grand and classy.
According to the schedule announced on Friday, Day 2 is themed as "a walk to the wild side" and "a potpourri of desi activities." Guests will begin the day by visiting the Ambanis' animal rescue and rehabilitation center in Jamnagar, Gujarat.The dress code for this event is 'jungle fever'.
Earlier this week, Reliance Industries and the Reliance Foundation unveiled the Vantara (Star of the Forest) program. This initiative aims to address the needs of injured, abused, and endangered animals, both domestically in India and internationally.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreAfter the wildlife walk, guests will be guided to the 'Mela Rouge,' where a variety of traditional South Asian activities will unfold. The dress code for this part of the event is "South Asian attire."
Guests from various parts of the globe have already gathered in Jamnagar, Gujarat, to join in the pre-wedding celebrations of Anant Ambani, the youngest son of businessman Mukesh Ambani. Anant is soon to marry Radhika Merchant, the daughter of industrialist Viren Merchant.
On the first day of the three-day celebration, guests enjoyed "an evening in Everland," featuring a mesmerizing Cirque du Soleil performance and a show at Vantara. The festivities also included a spectacular drone show, marking Rihanna's debut performance in India. The evening concluded with a lavish dinner and an exciting after-party.
The star-studded Bollywood guest list for the three-day gala included luminaries such as Shah Rukh Khan, Akshay Kumar, Aamir Khan, Ranveer Singh, Deepika Padukone, Sidharth Malhotra, Kiara Advani, Ananya Panday, Aditya Roy Kapur, Varun Dhawan, David Dhawan, Anil Kapoor, Sonam Kapoor, Shanaya Kapoor, Disha Patani, Riteish Deshmukh, Genelia, and Suniel Shetty, among many others.
Rihanna steals the show at pre-wedding bash of Anant Ambani-Radhika Merchant in Jamnagar