A ctor Anupama Gowda’s exposure to wildlife was limited to zoos and safaris until a conversation with her friend Ishita Varsha, fresh from her wilderness adventures, ignited a spark. “Ishita’s stories left me riveted and I decided to accompany her on the next trip,” she shares. Armed with a camera, she ventured into the wild. “The untouched beauty transfixed me,” says the actor, who now actively documents and shares clicks from her wildlife adventures on social media.Excerpts:
‘Witnessing a fresh kill and migration of animals left a deep impact on me’
My first trip to the Kanha Wildlife Sanctuary in Madhya Pradesh, left an indelible impact on me. I remember seeing the remains of a zebra and giraffe that had been hunted just 15 minutes before we had arrived. During my trip to Africa, I witnessed the migration of thousands of animals. All of these sights are etched in me.

    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo‘I really connect with nature during these wildlife trips’
In Bengaluru, I’m extremely busy and hooked to my phone owing to professional commitments. But, when I go on these wildlife trips, I connect with nature. It leaves me healed as I surrender completely to its wonders. When we go into the forests, many times we leave our phones behind. It has helped me minimise my phone usage even when I’ve returned to regular life.
A page from Anupama’s wildlife diary:
Cost involved: A good camera will cost you 1.5 lakh and upward. Invest in a free-flowing lens that lets you zoom into tiny details. 
Time, perseverance and patience is key: Don’t expect to get results as soon as you get into it. You will need at least two or three years before you can get an independent show. 
An expensive affair: In India, a good safari with stay will cost you at least one lakh rupees. Going abroad will be three times the cost and more. Always choose to go with a professional guide. 
My next aim: I want to exhibit my work and give my photographs in print as birthday gifts to friends.