The first cases of bird flu have been detected in seabirds in the Antarctic, according to the British Antarctic Survey, CNN reported.
The discovery has ignited concerns about the potential swift transmission of the disease within the densely populated colonies of birds and mammals in the region.
“Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) has been confirmed in brown skua populations on Bird Island, South Georgia – the first known cases in the Antarctic region,” the British Antarctic Survey said in a statement Monday.
Situated in the eastern region of South America's tip and slightly north of Antarctica's main landmass, South Georgia is a part of the British overseas territory. 
According to the British Antarctic Survey, it is suspected that the birds transported the disease upon their return from migratory journeys to South America.
In August this year, OFFLU – an open network of global avian influenza experts – warned of a “substantial risk” of a southward spread of the HPAI H5 virus from South America, where it was first detected in October 2022.
In a report published August 23, OFFLU warned that the disease could reach Antarctica and its offshore islands “due to the spring migration of wild birds from South America to breeding sites in the Antarctic.”
The British Antarctic Survey has underscored the “immense” negative impact on the Antarctic wild birds and mammal population due to “their likely susceptibility to mortality from this virus, and their occurrence in dense colonies of up to thousands of pinnipeds and hundreds of thousands of birds, allowing efficient virus transmission. "
Antarctica and its offshore islands are home to “more than 100 million breeding birds, six species of pinnipeds and 17 species of cetaceans,” according to OFFLU, which warns of the possibility of “efficient virus transmission” in the region.
The British Antarctic Survey, responsible for overseeing the UK's national scientific endeavors in Antarctica, operates two research stations in South Georgia, including one on Bird Island, where the confirmed cases of the virus were identified.