In forest areas, behave like wild animals – they don’t spread trash. This simple message on social media shared by IFS officer Parveen Kaswan with a photo of a cleanliness drive in a jungle area has garnered nearly 56,400 views and has also swung the focus back on keeping our forests clean. As tourists flock to national parks and wildlife sanctuaries in winter, conservationists want them to carry their litter back.
“Mera ek bottle se kya hoga?’ This mindset needs to change,” explains Pawan Sharma, founder of RAWW (Resqink Association for Wildlife Welfare), and Honorary Wildlife Warden with the Maharashtra forest department. “Non-biodegradable littering not only causes an immediate impact on the animals staying in the forests and national parks, but also impact the environment for many decades,” he adds.
According to Aaliya Mir, Programme Head of Wildlife SOS in Kashmir, littering can lead to major problems in the lifestyle of the resident population of wild animals in an ecosystem. “Just like domestic animals, wild animals are also attracted to garbage dumps as they provide easy access to food,” says Mir.

    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo10 KG LITTER CLEARED
Dukchen Bhutia, who led a team of forest staff to clear over 10 kg of litter from the Mahakal Caves area, near the Bhutan border, says, “Garbage, primarily consisting of single-use plastic, is frequently found in large quantities in areas accessible to visitors. We need to tell people to clean up the litter they generate.
Rules to follow when visiting a forest area
● Avoid carrying inorganic, nonbiodegradable waste such as plastic bottles, packets, straws and cutlery
● If you want to carry edibles, bring your own tifﬁn or ﬂask bottle so that you can take the waste back with you when you return
● Carry an extra garbage bag. Pick up littered waste while coming back
● Do not smoke or drink inside a forest area
Volunteers collect trash left behind by visitors at Yeoor Hills, which is a part of Sanjay Gandhi National Park (Pic/RAWW)
"A few weeks back, we found a plastic container stuck inside a deer’s mouth in Sanjay Gandhi National Park, Mumbai. In the past, a leopard’s head was stuck inside the plastic jar. Littering in natural spaces causes harm to the wildlife residing in it," says Pawan Sharma, wildlife activist and honorary forest warden.
Camera trap captures brown bear cubs walking amid dumped garbage (Pic/WildlifeSOS)
"We have earlier rescued a Himalayan brown bear cub from near an Amarnath Yatra campsite in Panchtarni. The nine-month-old male cub got its head stuck inside a garbage can. The young bear frequented the place since he picked up the habit of raiding cans at the campsite used by pilgrimage devotees," says Aaliya Mir, programme head of Wildlife SOS, Kashmir.