Nagpur: NT3, a 20-month-old sub-adult tigress translocated to Navegaon-Nagzira Tiger Reserve (NNTR) from Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve (TATR) on April 11, has travelled around 60km to Koka Wildlife Sanctuary in Bhandara district.
“Koka is part of the 653 sq km NNTR and has enough scope to accommodate additional tigers. We are closely monitoring NT3, which was also sighted by tourists.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe tigress has been in the sanctuary for nearly 15 days. We will have to wait and watch whether it stays put,” said Jayerame Gowda, field director of NNTR.
The tigress was released in the Dhawda Plot area in Nagzira sanctuary a month ago. It was re-collared on April 15 after the animal removed the first radio collar. NT3 explored the habitat for a few days and also preyed on wild boars. 
“There are six adult and two sub-adult resident tigers in NNTR. It is possible that NT3 must have been pushed out, or moved out in search of new territory. Such movement is good for the gene pool,” said wildlife conservationists.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo“Post-release it was feared the young tigress would end up in conflict with adult tigers in the park, but surprisingly it reached Koka safely. The tigress movement also shows that it prefers core area,” they said.
However, Wildlife Institute of India (WII) scientist Bilal Habib says, “NT3 is an exploring and dispersing female. More than searching for a mate, she is scouting for better territory to settle down. If Koka suits her she may settle or return.” 
Gowda said, “The tigress moved through Chorkhamara, Umarzari, New Nagzira Sanctuary to reach Koka. NT3 must have crossed roads, rivulets, nullahs, and agriculture fields but did not come in conflict with humans. At one time, it had come close to the NH6 near Gadegaon depot but returned. It is also a result of better monitoring. As it is a resident of the core area, the tigress is looking for similar type of new territory.” 
On May 18, 2023, two young tigresses — one captured from Armori in Gadchiroli, and another (NT2) from Pangdi near Kolsa range of Tadoba — were released in the core area of NNTR. This is the first conservation translocation experiment by Maharashtra.
However, while the female captured from Pangdi (NT2) occupies both the core and buffer area, another female from Armori (NT1) left the park to settle down in the NNTR-Kanha corridor, over 60-70km from the tiger reserve in Balaghat. 
“A tigress deserting the park was one of the reasons NNTR wanted a female from the core and not territorial area,” said forest sources.
NTCA-WII national tiger monitoring report of 2022 shows the tiger population in the state is estimated to be 444. The 653 sq km NNTR has 12 tigers and there is enough scope to accommodate additional tigers, especially in Koka and New Nagzira wildlife sanctuaries.
PCCF (wildlife) Maheep Gupta believes the conservation translocation plan would help augment tiger numbers in NNTR and also curb man-animal conflict in some way. “We will release eight tigers in Sahyadri Tiger Reserve (STR) in phases soon. More tigers will be translocated after scientifically identifying different protected areas,” said Gupta.