The Noida Police have filed a chargesheet against YouTuber Elvish Yadav and eight others in the snake venom-rave party case. The 1200-page charge sheet includes evidence of exotic snake smuggling and rave events.
Elvish Yadav was detained on March 17 for allegedly supplying snake venom at a suspected rave party in Noida. He was later brought to court and sentenced to 14 days in judicial custody.PollBigg Boss OTT 3: Payal Malik gets eliminated; was it fair?NoYesThe culprit was found in possession of 20 ml of snake venom by Noida police. However, five days after his detention, a Noida court granted him bail in the drug case.
The YouTuber was accused under sections of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, the Wildlife Protection Act, and the Indian Penal Code.
Elvish Yadav was one of six people identified in an FIR submitted at Noida's Sector 49 Police Station on November 3, last year.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoAccording to the most recent chargesheet filed by Noida Police, Elvish Yadav was in communication with the snake charmers. It also explains why the NDPS was enforced in the instance. 
Bigg Boss OTT Winner Elvish Yadav sent to 14 day custody in snake venom case
Elvish Yadav is currently trending on social media due to an alleged feud with Manisha Rani. Both appeared on Bigg Boss OTT 2 and were acclaimed for their collaboration. However, Manisha Rani recently unfollowed Elvish Yadav. She then posted a video describing the situation. She added that they worked together on a video, and Elvish Yadav shared a cover photo with him and Akshay Kumar. Despite several attempts, Elvish Yadav refused to change the cover photo, and she unfollowed him.
Elvish Yadav recently shared a Vlog in which he discussed his argument with Manisha Rani. He explained that they were all small difficulties. He mentioned that he was going through a difficult time and was anxious about a cover shot. Elvish Yadav's admirers have unexpectedly banded together to support him.