Belagavi: Amid the scorching summer heat, water sources in forest regions are dwindling, leaving wildlife with limited options. As a result, animals are compelled to roam in search of water. However, nestled near Malava village, within the jurisdiction of Nilavade village panchayat in Khanapur taluk, a lake, planned and constructed by the forest department years ago, stands as an oasis for parched wildlife.
The temperature in Belagavi district increases from 38 to 41 degrees Celsius during summer.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe entire district has been reeling from water scarcity this year. In hilly regions too, there is no drinking water left for wildlife during the summer. 
Foreseeing the situation, the forest department in 2014-15 initiated a project to build a lake in the forest near Malava village. The forest department took help under the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA) scheme, which provided a grant of Rs 4.8 lakh. As a result of the efforts of the then range forest officer (RFO) Ningani of Khanapur Zone, a 65 metres long, 60 metres wide and 4 metres deep lake was constructed on the forest land of survey numbers 17 and 18. Around the lake, fig, mango, jackfruit, violet and other fruit trees were planted.
The lake never dried up and there is no shortage of water. The special feature here is that there has been no water shortage over the years since the construction of the lake. Malava Lake quenches the thirst of many animals and bird species such as tigers, bison, leopards, bears, deer, wild boars and so on. The wildlife spread over thousands of hectares of forest area of Kanjale, Muguda and surrounding villages have benefited from this lake.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoWhat officials and greens say
Environment lovers have lauded the action of forest department officials who constructed a lake in the forest to cater to the needs of wild animals and birds.
Social activist Prasanna Kulkarni and environment activist Mahantesh Jangati said that during droughts and heavy rains, there are changes in the behaviour of wildlife. Every year, there are examples of wildlife straying into the city in search of food and water. The forest officials have taken many initiatives so that there is no shortage of water in the forest, which is commendable.
Khanapur assistant conservator of forests (ACF) Sunita Nimbaragi said there is enough water in the lake constructed near Malava village even during the hot summer of May this year. Every day, innumerable wild animals throng this lake to drink water. This is worthwhile work for the department, which has given them satisfaction, he added.
Environment activist Vasudev Chougale said: “The lake is located around half a kilometre away from Malava village. It still has enough water for the next 3 to 4 months. The sound of birds chirping every morning and at dusk on the banks of this lake is as sweet as music.”