Nagpur: The joint patrols of rural police with Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Company Limited (MSEDCL) and the forest department have prompted farmers to themselves stop illegal electrification of their farm fences. The farmers had been electrifying their fences, mostly by stealing power, to keep wildlife away.
The illegal practice of electrifying fences had repeatedly come to fore in the recent past after electrocution of wild animals.Some human deaths too have been reported. Last month, a man and his grandson were electrocuted in Narkhed after which SP rural Harssh A Poddar had started a concerted effort with MSEDCL and forest department to act against farmers illegally electrifying their fences.
After the latest Tiger Cell meeting, which is chaired by Poddar in the district, the joint patrolling exercises have been stepped up. It’s learnt Poddar urged the police stations at Khapa, Narkhed, Ramtek, Bhiwapur and Kondhali to take proactive steps to conduct joint patrolling and also initiate stringent action against erring farmers.
Poddar told TOI the aim of initiating patrolling and orchestrated action is to ensure deterrence. “The aim was to conduct visible policing so farmers become conscious about their violations and start withdrawing before even we need to interfere,” said Poddar, adding joint patrolling will continue till January-end at least. 
Poddar, in a letter to MSEDCL,forest department and the concerned police officials, is learnt to have urged more activities in areas adjoining forests. The SP had earlier ensured a MSEDCL official was served a show cause notice. “Our surveillance activities would be intensified during the ongoing winter season, when wildlife moves out of the forests and ventures into the human colonies for food and water. This is the period maximum electrocution cases have taken place in the past,” said Poddar.
The SP, sounding positive about the ongoing anti-electrocution drive, said that the farmers have started voluntarily removing the electrified fences. “The patrolling staffers have shared feedback that farmers are removing electric supply to fences, which is a positive sign,” said Poddar.
Rural police source said anti-electrocution drive was initiated in the last couple of days in the buffer areas of Umrer wildlife range, Parseoni sub-division near Navegaon, and also near Sillari gate in Khapa village. “The villagers were counselled against electrifying their fences,” said the rural police source, adding joint patrols were also conducted at Indapur Bhiwapur forest area.