Nagpur: The tusker CME3 that trampled five villagers — three in Gadchiroli and two in Telangana last month — killed one more woman on Thursday in Koregaon in Dhamtari forest division in Chhattisgarh.
The elephant attacked a woman, Surekha Kirtan, a resident of Keregaon village in the Dhamtari forest division. The victim was collecting tendu leaves and panicked after seeing the elephant.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThis is CME3’s seventh victim. Earlier in November 2023, the tusker is feared to have trampled one person in Chhattisgarh.

As reported by TOI, the 35-year-old tusker was on its way to Chhattisgarh and was last seen on April 29 in Parambhatti, 2km from the Gadchiroli border. In the last four days, the animal seems to have travelled more than 200km to reach the Dhamtari forest.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoRicha Kumar, a wildlife biologist monitoring elephants in Chhattisgarh for the last five years, denied the elephant was rogue. 
“In the last four days, it travelled over 200km but did not harm anyone, proving it is not a problem elephant. The animal entered Gadchiroli thrice, perhaps to meet the herd of 23 elephants already there but returned each time,” she said.
“I have been monitoring CME3 for the past two years. The attacks might have happened when the animal faced disturbing situations like people getting excited to take photographs or bursting crackers near it. Elephants never attack out of sudden, they first give a mock charge,” said Kumar.
CME3 was first sighted in Bhamragarh early last month. On April 3 and 4, it entered neighbouring Telangana, where it trampled two people. On April 25, the elephant trampled a farmer, Gonglu Telami, in the Gatta forest range in the Bhamragarh division. 
On April 26, it critically injured three women at a religious function in Hidur. Two wounded women died at Chandrapur District Hospital while the third woman is said to stable.
“This is not abnormal behaviour of a tusker. It is seen that most of the conflict arises from a loner bull, even if it is not in musth. In the case of CME3, all the human casualties were reported when they came in its path,” says Sagnik Sengupta of Stripes and Green Earth (SAGE), who also works with the Maharashtra forest department.
“All casualties in Maharashtra and Telangana happened in hostile territories, wherein people never imagined wild elephants roaming around. Going by the elephant’s body language, it first gives a mock charge, and if the opponent runs it chases him. It is very important to monitor a loner bull to avoid conflicts,” Sengupta said.