Vadodara: Just over a decade ago, crocodiles used to venture out of the Vishwamitri River and other water bodies largely during the monsoon.
But with the surge in their numbers and increasing concretization in and around the city, the number of reptiles venturing close to human habitations has risen significantly 
Official figures from the forest department reveal that one crocodile was rescued every third day in the city in the last four years.
“The number of crocodile rescues has gone up notably. We have a good team of forest department and many NGOs as well as activists help us in the rescue work,” said Agneeshwar Vyas, divisional forest officer (DFO), social forestry, Vadodara.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo In 2023-24, 113 crocodiles were rescued from Vishwamitri River and the other lakes in and around Vadodara while the number was 134 in 2022-23. Wildlife activists, who assist the department in the rescue work, said that they have seen a rise in the number of rescue calls.
“Earlier, crocodiles ventured out of Vishwamitri or lakes mostly during rains when the water level swelled. But now they are spotted on the roads or in the fields even during winter and summers,” said Vishal Thakur, a wildlife activist. Another reason, according to Thakur, is encroachment and development activities.
“Many residential and commercial development activities are happening along Vishwamitri River and the lakes. The humans have encroached on the space that once was a shelter for the crocodiles. With the river ravines and areas around the lakes being taken over by construction, reptiles are seen venturing out on the roads too,” Thakur told TOI.
 Raj Bhavsar, president of Gujarat Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (GSPCA), also cited the rise in the number of reptiles as one of the reasons behind the increased rescue calls.
“The population of crocodiles has gone up and the expanding urban infrastructure is also making these reptiles move out of their water bodies. Residential colonies are coming up around the water bodies in and around the city. When people spot a crocodile near their home, they call up the forest department or wildlife activists,” Bhavsar said. “Also, a few unprofessional wildlife activists sometimes rescue crocodiles from their natural abode just to score over each other in the number of rescues,” Bhavsar revealed. 
He added that he has been educating citizens to let the reptiles move around in their habitat and ask for rescue only if they enter their property.