AHMEDABAD: The state forest department has proposed that land falling within a maximum of 10.2km of the boundary of Gir Wildlife Sanctuary and National Park be declared an eco-sensitive zone (ESZ). 
An ESZ is a buffer zone around the protected area that minimizes the negative impact of activities like illegal mining and construction around its vicinity. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo

In the April 2017 proposal, this buffer around the sanctuary was 4.2km while in 2015, it was 17km. The proposal has been forwarded to the Union government. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoESZ revised based on movement of radio-collared lions
 The proposal by the Union government stipulates that no development activity will be carried out in the restricted area without the consent of the forest department or the ESZ monitoring committee.
 The ESZ boundary was revised in the latest proposal after taking into account the movement of radio-collared lions in the area and the areas where the remains of the prey were found.
Sources close to the development said the new proposal covers around 200 villages over 2.3 lakh hectare area. This ESZ around the sanctuary is not uniform and ranges from a minimum of 1km to a maximum of 10km. The proposed ESZ width towards the Mitiyala sanctuary was zero as its ESZ touches the boundary of the Gir sanctuary. The ESZ width around areas towards Sutrapada was 10km since the movement of the animals was maximum here.
The first proposal sent by the state to the Centre in 2015-16 had proposed a maximum width of 17km and a minimum of 8km for the ESZ around Gir, covering 291 villages over 3.32 lakh hectare. However, following political pressure just ahead of the 2017 election, the state government scaled down the ESZ width to a maximum of 4km and a minimum of 500m, covering only 1.14 lakh hectare and 119 villages, sources said.
Officials said the area along the Shetrunji has come up as a major corridor allowing the lions to move to Bhavnagar and hence the latest proposal for ESZ around the river was extended up to Palitana despite political pressure to restrict the buffer zone till Amreli. This means sand mining will be possible in an area beyond 500m from the riverbed on both sides. However, for smaller rivers, the restricted area will only be up to 250m from the riverbed.
The ESZ was revised following a high court order in July that allowed the state government to submit a fresh proposal for a buffer zone around the Gir Wildlife Sanctuary and National Park. The decision came six years after the court stayed the process of reducing the eco-sensitive zone (ESZ) around Gir.
The HC had initially stayed the issuance of any notification by the Centre regarding the ESZ around Gir as mentioned in the state government's proposal in 2017. This action was taken in response to a public interest litigation (PIL) filed by environmental activist Biren Padhya, who objected to the draft notification issued by the Centre in 2107.
However, the petitioner had submitted that he had no objection if the government adhered to its initial proposal of 3.32 lakh hectare. However, the official said the new proposal covered just 2.3 lakh hectare and 200 villages. Now it remains to be seen whether the proposal is finally accepted, said sources in the department.