New Delhi: Not just humans, the city's stray animals and urban wildlife are also struggling to cope with the soaring temperatures. While protected areas like Asola and Delhi Zoo are taking measures to protect the animals, strays — dogs, bovines and monkeys — have to rely on animal activists for support.
At Asola Wildlife Sanctuary, the number of water holes has been increased from 200 to 250, and the frequency of filling them has also been raised.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoAn official from Delhi's forest and wildlife department said: “The water retention in these holes is not more than two days, down from over a week earlier. So, more than 20 tankers are being used to keep them filled.”

Delhi Zoo has implemented additional measures for each species, including installing thermometers and air coolers in enclosures, maintaining water pools in carnivore areas, restricting exhibition times, removing stagnant water, covering water pools with sheds to keep them cool, and putting the animals on a summer diet. A zoo officials explained: “Animals are being released in the exhibit alternatively in two shifts: one animal in the morning (6am-12noon) and another in the evening (12noon-5pm). Sprinklers are being made operational, especially in all carnivore enclosures, including tiger, lion, leopard, jackal, hyena and wolf.” For herbivores, such as Sambar deer, swamp deer, nilgai, blackbuck, rhinoceros and elephants, running water is being provided in sheds, apart from sprinklers.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndo“A minimum of three showers are being given to elephants Shankar, Hiragaj and Rajlakshmi. Rhinos Anjuha and Maheshwari are also getting showers at least twice a day. Similar steps are being taken for primates, bears and birds, including diet alteration like giving more fruits, ice cubes and coconut water,” an official said, adding that in snake enclosures, wet gunny bags are being placed.
At Charity Bird Hospital, vets say 20-25 incidents of birds under stress are being reported daily. Dr Haravtar Singh from the hospital in Chandni Chowk advised: “Several cases of heat strokes are being reported among birds, dogs and cats. People are finding distressed birds on their balconies or roofs. We request people that if they find a bird in distress with its mouth wide open and rapid breathing, quickly sprinkle some water over their body and keep them in shade. One can also dip paws or claws of the animals in water to provide immediate relief.”
Muhammad Saud, who, along with his brother Nadeem Shehzad runs Wildlife Rescue, said that, on Monday, they received a record 85 cases of birds under distress.
“Earlier, the maximum number of cases we received on a single day was 56 — on May 31, 2023. All records are being broken. These are all cases of heat strokes. Most of these birds are juvenile and are still learning to find food and water,” said Saud.
Animal welfare organization Wildlife SOS, too, received distress calls from India Gate and South Delhi areas and rescued several peacocks, monkeys and parakeets.
“All these cases are of heat strokes. They are undergoing hydrotherapy and are kept under a temperature-controlled environment. We request people to be a bit more tolerant if they find a bird or animal on their balcony or in front of their house. Put a wet cloth on them, sprinkle some water, and if not, simply call us,” said Kartick Satyanarayan from Wildlife SOS.
According to Geeta Seshamani from animal welfare organisation FRIENDICOES, there is about a 30% increase in incidents of heat stroke.
“People are saying that dogs are behaving oddly… Most cases are of pedigree dogs being abandoned as, there is a good network of feeders to take care of strays… People need to be very careful, especially while transporting animals,” said Seshamani.