Gandhi Sagar Wildlife Sanctuary (Mandsaur/Neemuch): The first batch of Cheetahs are likely to reach Gandhi Sagar sanctuary in Madhya Pradesh by November this year. But is the park ready?
There is excitement and anticipation for the next round as phase-1 at Kuno has met the project’s parameters so far despite deaths and challenges. As the spotlight slowly pans to Gandhi Sagar sanctuary, however, daunting hurdles are coming into view.Officers involved with Project Cheetah realise that much needs to be done to prepare the sanctuary to receive the next batch of these spotted speedsters from South Africa, although the official word is that everything is ‘nearly ready’. 
Deer & near
Shortage of prey base is a major problem. Nearly 5,000 antelopes have to be pushed in to augment prey base inside the 368.6 sqkm sanctuary, which nearly equally straddles Mandsaur and Neemuch.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More“Arranging this many antelopes and then shifting them to Gandhi Sagar is not going to be that easy,” admitted an officer. Insiders also fear stress-related mortalities among the deer population in the capture-and-transportation strategy being used by the forest officials now.
As the debate continues within closed circles, a meeting was called by the Project Cheetah team and state forest authorities along with South African experts on Monday on the capture and relocation of 400-odd black bucks from Shajapur district. 
Water barrier
Some officers are also concerned about the open end of the 64 sqkm fenced enclosure, where the backwaters of Chambal River are being used as a ‘natural barrier’.
The Gandhi Sagar Dam is key to a Jal Jeevan Mission project to provide tap connections for drinking water to all rural families in 1,200 villages of Neemuch and Mandsaur districts. Work started two years ago. An intake well is to be built in Hadi Kheda village and a water treatment plant in Bhimpura. Plus 245 high-level tanks will be constructed and approximately 5,000km of pipeline has to be laid. “If the backwater recedes due to this mission, the natural barrier will turn into open ground, making management of cheetahs more difficult,” said an officer.
Spots of bother
Like Kuno, leopards are a problem at Gandhi Sagar sanctuary. There are an estimated 20 leopards inside the 64 sqkm cheetah enclosure here, compared to just six leopards in 6 sq km that proved such a challenge at Kuno.
Also, Kuno was safer in terms of its protected area. Highway and human habitations are just outside the boundary of Gandhi Sagar sanctuary. 
As per the Project Cheetah Action Plan, Gandhi Sagar Sanctuary is the ‘perfect habitat’ for cheetah reintroduction with its grassland, open woodland and riverine ravines.
But it recommends management along with neighbouring state of Rajasthan (Chittorgarh Division and Bhainsrorgarh WLS) and addition of the territorial divisions of Mandsaur and Neemuch as buffers to secure 2,000 sq km of cheetah habitat.
Need thy neighbour
The project needs Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan to work together in allocating territorial forest divisions under a unified management plan with WLS, say sources. “We had a DFO-level meeting with our Rajasthan counterparts a few days back and things are moving in the right direction,” said an officer, requesting not to be named. He said this effort would be an important objective for cheetah reintroduction.
Agriculture along the banks of Gandhi Sagar Dam is the major occupation in the region, along with some livestock rearing. Officers say all villages inside the protected area have been cleared and there are no livestock remaining. The township of Gandhi Sagar is centrally located in the eastern range of the sanctuary and houses employees of the hydroelectric project. Fishing communities from Bengal have also been settled in the region to exploit the fishery sector in the area, says the report.
The Chambal cuts through the middle of Gandhi Sagar sanctuary, almost neatly dividing it in two. With the adjoining territorial divisions of Neemuch, Mandsaur, Bhainsrorgarh Wildlife Sanctuary and territorial division of Chittorgarh (Rajasthan), a larger cheetah habitat of 2,000 sqkm can be established. Gandhi Sagar is also connected to Mukundara via Bhainsrorgarh and the reserve forests of Chittorgarh near Rawatbhata.
Hope & prey
A site assessment was conducted in November 2020 to understand prey base, quality of habitat and identify issues concerning park management. Surveyors covered 111 km to obtain encounter rates and densities of prey species.
The technique used at Kuno in 2014 to calculate prey density was used at Gandhi Sagar as well since both areas have similar terrain and vegetation.
The Action Plan Report says that an average cheetah family / coalition is expected to make a kill every 3-4 days. Considering the finite growth rate of ungulates to be 1.33, a population of about 350 ungulates is required for a cheetah coalition family. So, About 1500 chital, 1,000 blackbuck and 350 chinkara need to be translocated to Gandhi Sagar within the next six months.
This prey base would sustain 7-8 cheetah families or coalitions. Assistance from professionally trained national and international agencies for mass capture and translocation of ungulates may be sought for this exercise.
Experts said the first phase of augmentation should target the section west of the Chambal River so that cheetah reintroduction can commence in this more protected part.
Hunters & hunted
Experts who had surveyed Gandhi Sagar sanctuary stressed on enhancement of protection across the region. They reported that the forest Department was quite vehement in stressing that poaching was not a problem. However, given the reasonably good status of the habitat, ungulate densities are extremely low, and the communities residing in the area are non-vegetarian, says the report. They stressed that the use of tools like MSTrIPES should be used to ensure spatial and timely coverage of sensitive areas.
Officials noted that development and restoration activities within Gandhi Sagar should commence from the Neemuch side of the Chambal. The initial plan was to reintroduce cheetahs in Gandhi Sagar by end-2021.
Not much has been done so far to sensitize communities towards cheetah reintroduction and to open up opportunities for eco-tourism. Officers had noted vehicular movement on two roads — state highway 31A and Rawatbhata- Gandhisagar Road, which they had said should be to be regulated with barriers and speed breakers so that vehicle speed is restricted to 40 kmph. Only then can the cheetah sprint like the world’s fastest land animal.