Panaji: The passing away of Asir Jawahar Thomas Johnsingh, a reputed wildlife biologist and pioneer conservationist, has saddened many Goa wildlifers, ecologists and others, as they said the vacuum will be difficult to fill.
AJT, as he was popularly known, made several trips to Goa to study conservation issues and often stressed the need for protection of forests to ensure Goa’s water security.
He died at 78 in Bengaluru on Friday morning.
As India’s leading naturalist and field biologist, he had carried out a study on dholes in the Bandipur Tiger Reserve in the late 1970s. This was followed by work in various part of the country on the conservation of the Asiatic elephant, Asiatic lion and other large animals. During his career, he trained a generation of wildlife biologists and forest officers at Wildlife Institute of India (WII), Dehradun. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeWSJ Custom StudiosMeet the Japanese Professor Pioneering Sustainable PlasticsWSJ Custom StudiosLearn MoreUndo“His exit is a loss for the conservation fraternity, for sure. He leaves a rich legacy of commitment to protect our wildlife heritage,” Manoj Borkar, zoology professor and a naturalist, said.
Johnsingh favoured a tiger reserve status for Goa’s Mhadei area and other protected zones, as he believed that it would secure the catchment areas of three rivers: Mhadei, Malaprabha and Tillari.
“That Western Ghat forests are very sensitive and require scientific management for Goa’s water security and, in turn, its economy, was his firm belief,” an environmentalist said. Johnsingh’s research on Indian carnivores and his fabled strict demeanour as a faculty and dean at WII, as learnt from Goan trainees, were among the things that impressed Borkar.
“His long hours in the field and his brilliance at interpreting his observations were reflected in his published work,” Borkar said.
The former WII dean was obliging and even visited Chicalim bay. “This was in connection with our efforts to save the windowpane oyster, a Schedule-IV species with brood stocks here,” Borkar said.
During his study of the prey base in Goa’s protected areas, which form a contiguous wildlife corridor with Karnataka and Maharashtra, he was concerned about rampant poaching and encroachments in protected areas.
According to Johnsingh, a poor prey base forces tigers to attack livestock. “He said if the habitat is protected, the prey base would improve in a few years,” a wildlifer said.