Pune: The Junnar division of Maharashtra forest department has proposed translocation of 75 leopards from 4 conflict zones of Junnar, with high leopard densities, to four wildlife sanctuaries in the state.
The proposal sent to Maharashtra’s principal chief conservator of forest (wildlife) Maheep Gupta on June 11 relates to 25 hotspot villages in each pocket, such as Ambegaon and Shirur near Bhima river, with around 40 leopards in each hotspot, as per population density calculation by the Wildlife institute of India.

“The higher the leopard density, the more the number of conflicts. We need to move some of the leopards from the region to reduce the number of conflicts. We have planned translocation of 75 leopards, which would mean removing one-third of the population from each hotspot,” said a senior official of the department.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe leopards will be sent to Pranita Wildlife Sanctuary, Amragad Wildlife Sanctuary, Radhanagari Wildlife Sanctuary and Sahyadri Tiger Reserve. 
The proposal must be approved by the Central Zoo Authority (CZA) after which a few radio-collared leopards will be sent to locations on a trial basis to see whether they return to Junnar or cause conflicts in new locations or they are able to adjust to climatic conditions.
Along with this, the division has demanded that a special leopard protection force be set up to manage conflicts in the region and reduce the workload on forest officials.
Taking a leaf out of the special tiger protection force in Tadoba-Andhari tiger reserve and Pench tiger reserve, the division on May 26 proposed the same to the state forest department. The 12-member force would comprise a range forest officer, round officer and a few more guards to look at tackling leopard conflicts (including capturing them), carrying out awareness drives and patrolling all hotspot regions. 
The post of range forest officer needs to be sanctioned by the state government after approval.
“We need a dedicated team to manage leopard conflicts as our other officers need to look at forest fires, plantation and departmental work,” said deputy conservator of forest, Junnar, Amol Satpute.
Meanwhile, the Central Zoo Authority has approved the transfer of 10 leopards from Junnar to Vantara zoo in Jamnagar, where they will live in lifetime confinement. “We are trying to solidify our efforts to mitigate conflicts by looking at every aspect possible,” said the deputy conservator of forest. The forest department is testing an AI system to help reduce leopard attacks.