Mumbai: The National Board of Wildlife has given its approval for the Thane-Borivli twin tunnels that will run under the Sanjay Gandhi National Park (SGNP). “This marks an important milestone in starting work of this watershed project (sic),” MMRDA commissioner Sanjay Mukherjee said in a post on X on Saturday.
The tunnels, which were proposed in 2017-18, aim to create direct connectivity between Western Express Highway in Borivli and Eastern Express Highway in Thane.This underground route is expected to take the pressure off Ghodbunder Road, which sees heavy traffic.
Based on the recommendations of the National Institute of Rock Mechanics, MMRDA has decided to use tunnel boring machines, for which the launching shaft will be built outside the forest area. MMRDA reasoned that since the tunnel will be constructed at a depth of 25m, there could be only negligible disturbance to the wildlife. Since the traffic will move inside the tunnel, there will be no disturbance once vehicles begin to use this corridor.
Around 235 trees are going to be axed, but MMRDA will have to undertake compulsory afforestation on a 36-hectare plot in Umravati village in Phulambri tehsil, Chhatrapati Sambhajinagar.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoEarlier, the project was to be executed by Maharashtra State Road Development Corporation, but it was handed over to MMRDA in 2020. This decision was taken as MMRDA has undertaken challenging projects like the Metro corridors, and has experience in getting relevant environmental clearances.
Road tunnels are mostly built on highways in hilly terrains. Urban road tunnels are often discouraged due to being an expensive option. An elevated road between Tikujiniwadi and Borivli would have been cheaper than the tunnels. However, the road option was not considered since it could cause significant disturbance to wildlife and acquisition of forest land if it passed through SGNP. On the other hand tunnel construction does not require any forest land (or very minimum land), no displacement of people and no tree cutting, and will cause little or no air and noise pollution during construction as well as during operations.