NEW DELHI: Delhi High Court on Thursday restrained the forest department from holding the Walk with Wildlife event later this month inside the Asola Bhatti Wildlife Sanctuary, saying it has all the "trappings of a misadventure".
The court said the event could endanger the lives of participants and wild animals inside the forest in the absence of adequate arrangements for safety and security."The advertisement shows a walkathon and a cyclothon on reserved and notified forest land, which according to me cannot be permitted as it not only endangers the lives of citizens, who will be willing to participate in the event, but also the lives of animals in the wildlife sanctuary," justice Jasmeet Singh said. The judge also noted that "no arrangement for safety and security" was given.
The order pointed out that Asola Bhatti has no demarcation of core and buffer zones to determine the movement of leopards and other animals, such as pythons and hyenas, which are also not tagged, and record showed that the permission for the proposed event on December 9 and 10 was granted in a mechanical manner with no analysis of the threat perception to people, the animals and the sanctuary.
"There has been a recent spotting of a leopard in Sainik Farms, which adjoins Asola. Six days have passed and yet the forest officers have failed to locate the stray leopard. According to the press news, this leopard has strayed in from the Asola Bhatti Wildlife Sanctuary and three people have been attacked. This is worrisome," the court said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe issues concerning the event, which was to be held on a 13-km track inside the sanctuary, were flagged before the court by the amici curiae appointed in a case related to conservation of the Ridge and removal of encroachments from there.
The court stressed that under the Wildlife (Protection) Act, there are stringent restrictions on entry into sanctuaries, barring in exceptional circumstances, and in the present case, no such exceptional reason has been given for grant of permission, except that it is for "eco-tourism".
The court said safaris and entries into sanctuaries should be planned activities to ensure a good balance between ecotourism and protection of wildlife.