RANCHI/DALTONGANJ: After mass deaths of fruit bats in the Garhwa, Daltonganj, Latehar and Ranchi districts because of extreme heat, 32 monkeys drowned inside a well in Palamu on Monday after they plunged into it to drink water and get respite from the heat. The monkeys were found floating in the well used for irrigation and located in Soraath village under the Panki block.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Incidentally, Daltonganj has been experiencing severe heatwave conditions during the past week. The maximum temperature touched the 47.7°C mark on May 30 while the minimum temperature 32.3°C was five notches above normal. The district has been facing day temperatures in the range of 40°C and above throughout the month of May.
On the monkey deaths, Umesh Kumar Dubey, the range officer of Palamu Tiger Reserve (PTR), said, "The well is old and cemented. It is around 20 feet deep with 7 to 8 feet of water. The monkeys, unaware of the danger, jumped into it but could not climb up." The carcasses were retrieved manually and autopsy was conducted by veterinary doctors from the PTR and the district animal husbandry unit. They found no foul play in the deaths and water in the lungs of the animal.
Palamu animal husbandry officer Dr Prabhakar Sinha said, "I have sent two of our vets, Dr Rajat Singh (touring veterinary officer) and Dr Santosh Rabaani (Panki block animal husbandry officer), to assist the PTR vet, Dr Sunil, in conducting the autopsy."
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoThe monkeys were putrefied due to the heat and water, and a stinky smell permeated the area. The carcasses were buried with salt to accelerate the decomposition process, he added.
The DFO (in-charge) of Medininagar, Kumar Ashish, said the wildlife was being adversely impacted due to rising heat and water scarcity. "A similar incident of jackals, nilgais, and deer falling into manmade water bodies within the forest area was reported recently. They were rescued," he said.
Assistant professor of veterinary science and animal husbandry at the Birsa Agriculture University, Dr Nandini Kumar, blamed such incidents on the shrinking habitat of wildlife and the impact of severe heat on them. "Animals are worst affected in case of severe heatwaves when they do not have sufficient tree cover and water source. They stray into human habitats. In this case, the cause of death must be investigated scientifically to protect other wildlife," she said.
Experts believed that apart from fatigue or dehydration, the monkeys might have been exposed to some poisonous gas inside the well. "Experts should be engaged to probe the deaths and strategise conservation steps on an urgent basis," Dr Kumari added.