Raipur: Wildlife activist has expressed concerns about the “significant” public funds allocated for the care of buffaloes, relocated from Manas Tiger Reserve in Assam to Chhattisgarh’s Barnawapara Wildlife Sanctuary, alleging lack of transparency in expenditure details.
“The Forest Department has no information on the amount spent on wild buffaloes in Assam and Barnawapara.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoTherefore, the principal chief conservator of forest (wildlife) should make public the total amount spent on the wild buffaloes from Assam till date,” Nitin Singhvi, a wildlife enthusiast, told TOI.
He further mentioned that two young buffaloes, a male and a female, were kept in a kraal for two months after being captured in the Assam’s Manas Sanctuary in 2020. A budget of about Rs 4.60 lakh was allocated for water supply during their stay in the kraal. Later, six new coolers were installed at Barnawapara and it was also decided that air conditioners and green nets would be set up to control the temperature after shifting them to the state.
In 2023, four more female buffaloes were brought from Assam. An amount of Rs 1 lakh was specifically set aside to help them regulate their temperature by providing water. In 2020, a kraal was constructed in Assam. However, the Forest Department does not have details about the expenses related to it, Singhvi said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoHe alleged that in 2023, Rs 15 lakh were allocated for its maintenance and Rs 58 lakh for transporting buffaloes from Assam to Chhattisgarh on two separate occasions. Between 2019-20 and 2020-21, Rs 1.62 crore was allocated for constructing and maintaining the Barnawapara breeding centre. Additional funds have been used since 2021, he added.
Singhvi further said that RTI documents indicated that in the fiscal year 2023-24, Rs 40 lakh were allocated for the food for six buffaloes at Barnawapara, comprising gram, khari, chuni, parakutti, dal, and grass.
There is a chance that if the wild buffaloes brought from Assam are released in the Udanti Sitanadi Tiger Reserve, they could breed with the existing mix breed of buffaloes, leading to “impurity” in their lineage, he said. Singhvi questioned the forest department if the buffaloes were supposed to be confined and bred for their entire lifespan at the Barnawapara Sanctuary.
Responding to the claims, divisional forest officer (DFO) Mayank Agrawal told TOI that Rs. 4.60 lakh were utilized to install solar pumps and digging a bore well at Manas Sanctuary. “Around Rs 14 lakh were designated for food out of the total budget of Rs. 40 lakh,” Agrawal added. 
The forest department has however said that in the fiscal year 2023-24, Rs 25 lakh were allocated as against Rs 40 lakh shown in the RTI document.