THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: O R Kelu, who was sworn in as the new minister in the Pinarayi 2.0 cabinet here on Sunday, said that the issues related to wildlife attacks in Wayanad will be taken up seriously and steps will be being taken to appoint a special officer and form a committee for it. 
Kelu was sworn in as minister in the presence of governor Arif Mohammed Khan and chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan at a function organized at Raj Bhavan on Sunday evening.Cabinet ministers, opposition leader V D Satheesan and IUML leader P K Kunhalikutty were present at the Raj Bhavan for the swearing-in ceremony.
After the ceremony, Kelu went straight to the Secretariat to assume charge. Speaking to the media at the Secretariat, Kelu said, "Will try to find a permanent solution to the man-animal conflict in consultation with MLAs and MPs from the district. A minister alone cannot resolve the wildlife attacks. Hence a discussion at all levels will be held."
Kelu said that a state-level departmental committee would be convened to work for the welfare of scheduled castes and would study the legal aspects of changing the word 'colony'. He hoped that the expectations of people of Wayanad can be met through his cabinet berth.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoKelu became minister to replace K Radhakrishnan, who was elected to the Lok Sabha from Alathur. Kelu is the first minister in CPM from the Scheduled Tribe community. Earlier, P K Jayalekshmi from the community was a minister in the Oommen Chandy govt.
CM, governor shake hands
The cold war between the governor and chief minister seems to have ended, at least for the time being, with both shaking hands at the tea party organized by the governor after the swearing-in ceremony at Raj Bhavan.
Earlier, during the oath ceremony both sat next to each other without any exchange of words. But soon after the ceremony the governor invited everyone for the tea party, which the chief minister and his cabinet colleagues attended. Opposition leaders also attended the tea party.