Jaipur: The state forest department has released the zonal master plan for seven eco-sensitive zones (ESZ) with a focus on biological and environmental conservation.
The list includes Nahargarh Wild Life Sanctuary, Jamwa Ramgarh Wild Life Sanctuary in Jaipur, Rajasthan, Mukundara Hill Tiger Reserve Wild Life Sanctuary, Keoladeo National Park Wild Life Sanctuary, Bassi Wild Life Sanctuary, Sitamata Wild Life Sanctuary, and Bhainsroadgarh Wild Life Sanctuary.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
An official stated, “The Zonal Master Plans of eco-sensitive zones address all key development issues, including land use, infrastructure, and transportation, with a primary focus on ecology, environment, and wildlife.”
The Zonal Master Plan also incorporates a tourism plan, including studies to analyse the current conditions of various significant tourist destinations. This encompasses their current situation and infrastructure availability, tourism statistics, environmental issues, and the identification of potential tourism sites, as well as the creation of facilities for the overall improvement of tourism footfall and tourism sites. These records will facilitate the determination of the historical significance and heritage value of potential tourist destinations.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreAnother official mentioned that the ESZ has been demarcated up to an extent of 13 kilometres around the boundary of Nahargarh Wildlife Sanctuary in Jaipur, covering an area of 79.35 sq. km. According to the Gazette Notification of MoECC dated March 8, 2019, there are a total of 26 villages falling within the limits of Nahargarh ESZ. Out of these, 13 villages fall under Nahargarh Wildlife Sanctuary, while the remaining 13 villages are in the rest of the ESZ area. “After the approval of the Zonal Master Plan, locals living in these villages can construct houses up to a maximum height of 10.5 meters. However, if the allowed height, as per the building bylaws of JDA, is less than 10.5 meters, the lesser height would be applicable. The maximum ground coverage allowed is 20%. Other building parameters will be as per the prevailing Building Byelaws of JDA,”
As per the Zonal Master Plan for all ESZs, all new and existing mining operations (minor and major minerals), stone quarrying, and crushing units are prohibited with immediate effect, except for meeting the domestic needs of bona fide residents, including digging of earth for the construction or repair of houses and for the manufacture of country tiles or bricks for housing and other activities. Mining operations shall be carried out in accordance with the order of the Supreme Court.
Similarly, no new commercial hotels and resorts shall be permitted within one kilometer of the boundary of the protected area or up to the extent of Eco-Sensitive Zone, whichever is nearer, except for small temporary structures for eco-tourism activities.