City Biodiversity Index (CBI) of Hyderabad has revealed that there are 53 reptile species, including mugger crocodile and Bengal monitor lizard, and 315 bird (avian) species in the metropolis.
 CBI for Hyderabad was developed by ICLEI South Asia with support from Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation (GHMC) and in collaboration with various local biodiversity experts and organisations.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoCBI for Hyderabad has recorded 53 reptile species.

Of these, 52 were native species, while one was introduced. Native species include the Indian rock python, known for its impressive size and ecological significance, and the Bengal monitor , a large lizard. Other notable native species are the green vine snake, the Indian Cobra, and mugger crocodile. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe only introduced species documented is the red-eared slider (‘Trachemys scripta elegans’), which is often kept as a pet and has established a habitat in local water bodies. It recorded 315 bird species, including the Indian peafowl and the black-headed ibis . 
The city also welcomes several migratory species such as the bar-headed goose and the Greater Flamingo . Many birds thrive in urban areas, including the Eurasian spoonbill and the grey-headed lapwing. Hyderabad’s score on CBI improved significantly between 2012 and 2022, marking 58% increase.
 CBI serves as a crucial tool for monitoring and enhancing key ecological details, ensuring conservation of biodiversity, sustainability, and quality of life within a city. While both flora and fauna have been well-documented for various lakes, national parks, and wildlife sanctuaries in Hyderabad, a complete biodiversity profile of the city was first released in 2012 and then again in 2022, showing a better performance. The latest CBI unveils the extensive variety of flora and fauna thriving in Hyderabad’s tropical climatic zone. 
From the interspersed trails of forests in various parts of the city to the river Musi, CBI explores Hyderabad’s ecological wealth. Hyderabad is home to over 1,350 water bodies, including the Musi, Osmansagar, Himayatsagar, Hussainsagar, Shamirpet, and Uppuguda tanks. Shamirpet Lake, Hussainsagar and Mir Alam Tank attract both local and migratory birds from around the world. 
The city also features rock formations, over 1,600 hectares, and is dominated by southern tropical dry deciduous and thorn forests. Within Hyderabad, there are two national parks — Kasu Brahmananda Reddy National Park and Mahavir Harina Vanasthali National Park — home to diverse flora. 
Additionally, University of Hyderabad campus represents the ‘Deccan shrub jungle’ and hosts 734 plant species, 39 of which are globally threatened. “CBI is an important tool for a city like Hyderabad, highlighting that biodiversity is crucial in the process of becoming a world-class city. Initiatives by GHMC such as Haritha Haram, conservation of lakes, increasing forest cover, and improving urban lung spaces have significantly enhanced urban biodiversity,” ICLEI South Asia executive director Emani Kumar said.