KOLKATA: The World Cinema Documentary Special Jury Award for Craft at the Sundance Film Festival was awarded to Anirban Dutta and Anupama Srinivasan’s “Nocturnes”. What makes the award special for Kolkata is that sound recording has been done by Sukanta Majumdar who is a faculty of the Satyajit Ray Film and Television Institute (SRFTI).
Dutta, who flew down from Sundance via Delhi to Kolkata on Monday, told TOI: “Getting selected in Sundance Film Festival in World Documentary Competition is a huge honour.To get an award for craft was a huge validation for our approach to cinema, which is immersive.” The contribution of sound in the making of this documentary is especially important in the context of the jury citation that reads: “The images and sound in this film immediately invoke in the audience a meditative state as they enter the film’s world, at the same time bringing a laser focus to the film’s main subject. The confidence of the cinematography and sound design in building this story is part of its power and allure.” 
Sukanta Majumdar and Nethu Mohandas listening to the recording of previous night during the shooting of 'Nocturnes'
In the last leg of the shooting, another SRFTI student - Neethu Mohandas – did a lot of field recording that was used in the mix. She also played a role in sound design with Shreyank Nanjappa and Tom Paul. "As directors, both Anu and I play a big role in planning the soundscape. It is meticulously planned, executed and designed. For this, mics were clipped on to the mother screen to get the sound of the moth's flutter. Stereo mics were used to create dimension. Since we still felt we needed more depth, I got a 5.1 microphone from LA and used its recording to create the immersive experience. We also used a 360 degree VR mic. Lapels and unidirectional mics were used to record human voices. The film was mixed in one of the best Dolby Atmos facilities in NY of Sandbox films by Tom Paul. He is a brilliant sound designer and mixing engineer,” Dutta added.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoShooting started at least two years ago. “I am thankful to both Anirban and Anupama for giving me this opportunity and the space to do the kind of recording I wanted. The documentary gives an immersive experience through visuals and sound. As a student of sound, I am really interested in recording the ambience sound and what it means. I also want to see how a space can be explored sonically,” Majumdar said.
Sukanta Majumdar during the sound recording
Shooting at Arunachal Pradesh's Eagle's Nest Wildlife Sanctuary – a hotspot for scientists because of its rich biodiversity - was a challenging experience. The altitude of the forest ranges from 500 metres to 3,250 metres. “As a result, the temperature changes fast and so does the species of animals and insects,” Majumdar pointed out.
Scientists usually put up light screens at twilight and then wait for the moths to descend on them. “That happens around midnight. But all this while, they simply wait for the moths. What’s surprising is that the forest, despite being home to so many animals and insects, is completely shrouded by silence. There are no mobile towers. Since deep listening is an interesting process for me, I found myself blessed to be able to stay up all night to record the ambience sound. I also had to figure out what time of the day and from what distance a particular sound had to be recorded. Even the sound of the trickle of a tributary can vary depending on the distance and the time of the day when it is recorded,” Majumdar added.
The fear of snake bites or wild elephants wasn’t a deterrent. “We shot during extreme cold and monsoon. Leech bites were common. While recording, I could see a leech crawling down my forehead. I continued till it was impossible to withstand. Almost everyone in the unit had similar experiences,” Majumdar added. Yet, the memories of the shooting are precious. “I am happy that the Sundance jury has appreciated the film,” Majumdar concluded.