JODHPUR: Film actress Somy Ali's appeal to the Bishnoi community in Rajasthan to forgive actor Salman Khan for the alleged poaching of black bucks and chinkaras in 1998 during the shooting of film 'Ham Saath Saath Hain' has led to a divide within the community.
While one organisation of the community has offered to consider the appeal by Ali, another has declared that there is no question of accepting an apology.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
The disagreement has led to a section of the community calling for a meeting soon with wildlife organisations to push for speedy disposal of cases pending in different courts over the incident. 
Ali had said last week in an interview to a media house that everybody makes mistakes but it did not mean that the person be killed or bullets fired at him.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoShe further said that the incident happened many years ago when Salman was quite young and she appealed to the Bishnoi community to forgive him. 
Responding to this appeal, president of Akhil Bhartiya Bishnoi Mahasabha, Devendra Budia, said that if a proposal to this effect was sent by Khan, the community could consider it.
"Of the 29 rules of the (Bishnoi) community, one is forgiveness. If Khan comes to our temple, sits with community members and takes an oath for the conservation of environment and wildlife, and tenders his apology, we can think over it," Budia said in his statement. 
This did not go well with the Bishnoi Tiger Force (BTF), which termed Budia's statement as farcical and illegal. 
Releasing a video statement, president of the BTF, Rampal Bhawad, said that such statements were absolutely unwarranted and were attempts to weaken the spirit of the community in its fight against the poaching of wildlife.
"The matters of poaching by Khan are pending in courts from the high court to the Supreme Court and the state government is pleading these cases in the courts. Such statements are attempts to derail the legal proceedings against him," Bhawad said. 
He added that soon a meeting with wildlife organisations will be held to chalk out a meeting with the law minister to push for speedy disposal of cases of poaching against Khan.