Chennai: Tamil Nadu government on Friday sanctioned ₹19.5 crore for setting up three rescue, treatment and rehabilitation centres for wildlife at Pethikottai area in Coimbatore forest division.
State forest secretary Supriya Sahu said injured, orphaned, and sick wild animals will be treated and released back into the wild. The ones that move closer to human habitation will be rehabilitated in the centre.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
The centres will have well-equipped and well-trained teams to rescue wild animals in distress. It will provide expertise for scientific quarantine, rehabilitation, and release of wildlife in identified habitats after providing treatment. The centres will also function as a leading institution for consultation and guidance in addressing human-animal conflict issues. The centre will develop and standardize protocols for rescue, treatment, and rehabilitation activities, she said. 
The centre will be divided into four zones: a human zone (administrative buildings), a quarantine zone, a rehabilitation zone, and a lifetime care zone.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe quarantine zone will have facilities to accommodate large carnivores, birds, primates, small mammals, ungulates, and reptiles. 
The complex can be used for quarantining a multitude of species. Since 95% of the reptiles (predominantly snakes) get released within 24 hours, all the reptile rescue and rehabilitation activities will be confined to the quarantine zone, she said.
The rehabilitation zone will house the animals meant for release. It will have five enclosures that will cater to the needs of all the key species. There is space for adding a few more enclosures in case of any exigency, she said.
The lifetime care zone is for holding a limited number of wildlife that cannot be released. In the first phase, this zone will have 14 enclosures, each measuring 400sqm to 500sqm, where different species of deer and carnivores, especially leopards, can be accommodated, she said.