BHOPAL: The female cheetah named Veera has once again strayed from the boundaries of Kuno National Park in Madhya Pradesh's Sheopur district. This time it has reached Baghwala village, Gwalior, via Jaura and Pahargarh in Morena. This is the first time that Veera has gone too close to a city. It was last located near the Ghatigaon area on Sunday afternoon.
In the village, located near the Gwalior-Morena border, Veera attacked a herd of goats, taking down three in front of a shepherd.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Wildlife officials from Kuno are closely monitoring her movements and plan to guide her back to the National Park without tranquilizing or capturing her. There's concern among residents of Bhanwarpura and nearby villages, who are venturing outside only in groups.
Both Veera and another cheetah, Pawan, seem to be venturing outside the confines of Kuno over and again. Just recently, Pawan was brought back from Karoli in Rajasthan.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoAccording to local media a shepherd named Dharamveer Gurjar spotted Veera resting under a tree on a farm field ridge near Baghwala village on Saturday, approximately 2-2.5 kilometres from the Morena district border. The cheetah had taken down its prey, with two injured goats lying nearby.
Forest department officials, including Rangers Ankit Pandey, Shailendra Gurjar, and Mohana Sachin Gupta, arrived from Gwalior to monitor the situation. Veera remained in the area from 9 am to 5 pm before moving deeper into the forest.
Kuno National Park management informed the Gwalior Forest Division about Veera's movements. Wildlife staff from the Ghatigaon Game Range are monitoring the area, while the Forest Division has deployed additional personnel for security.
News of the cheetah's arrival attracted villagers from nearby areas. To ensure public safety, police and forest department personnel urged villagers to stay away from the location. The nearby Asan River is suspected to be a factor in Veera's attraction to the area.
Uttam Kumar Sharma, Additional Principal Chief Forest Conservator of Kuno National Park, confirmed that Veera is currently outside the park's boundaries. “We don’t share location to the public but Veera is safe wherever it is. We are monitoring the situation” he told TOI.
Last month Veera was rescued and brought back after she was found roaming in Jaura, Pahargarh, and Kailaras areas of Morena. 
While Pawan returned, Veera continued her journey, crossing into Jaura and Pahargarh bordering Morena district on March 27. Veera roamed these forests for 22 days. Considering the extended duration and safety concerns, following the recommendation of the Cheetah Steering Committee, a decision was made to rescue Veera. 
It was then tranquilized and transported back to Kuno, where she was released. During her time outside the park, Veera had hunted a Nilgai and preyed on approximately half a dozen goats. The Department had compensated the goat owners at Rs 3000 per goat hunted by Veera.Forest officials confirm that Veera has been successfully rescued and returned to Kuno National Park.