Daltonganj: A team of around 25 officials of the Palamu Tiger Reserve (PTR) on Saturday left for Madhya Pradesh where they will study the planning and management of wildlife for two days at the Sanjay Dubri Tiger Reserve and replicate them here.
The contingent is led by the chief conservator of forest and field director of PTR, Kumar Ashutosh. The other members of the delegate are deputy director PTR (north division) P K Jena, a biologist at the Wildlife Institute of India, Dehradun, Hritik Dhami, and a veterinary doctor among others.
Notably, PTR shares the landscape with tiger reserves in Madhya Pradesh as both states fall in the central India tiger corridor and Saturday’s visit of the PTR team to MP is not a first.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe PTR teams had visited other tiger reserves in the past like the Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve and the Kanha Tiger Reserve among others.
However, the Sanjay Dubri Tiger Reserve visit is seen as the most important as it came into existence just one year after the creation of the PTR, which was notified in 1974 but has not thrived as far as the tiger population is concerned when compared to the former. Currently, the Sanjay Dubri reserve, which has only 831 sqkm, has over 22 tigers, more than 30 leopards, 11 species of reptiles and many other wildlife.
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoPTR has little over 1,100 sqkm and the tiger population has been dwindling to almost zero now. A male tiger was captured on camera in March 2023 but left. There are reports of a couple of tigers in PTR but the officials are not sure when these big cats will move out.
Talking to TOI, P K Jena said, “We are going to Sanjay Dubri reserve to see their planning and management. The 25 members in our contingent will learn them.”
He further said, “We will see how the Boma technique (An African system of catching animals and translocating them) works there. We already have one Boma truck parked in our Betla National Park for two weeks or so but our cheetals, which we are to translocate, are shy of boarding it.”
Kumar Ashutosh informed that Sanjay Dubri reserve has translocated bison from the Kanha Tiger Reserve and they will also study how it was done.
Jena added, “Betla park has 70 to 80 bison though the PTR south has none. We will see how the Sanjay Dubri reserve brought the bison from Kanha.”