BHOPAL: A wandering tiger from Rajasthan has been spotted in Kuno National Park yet again amid rising concerns over depleting prey base in India's lone cheetah sanctuary.
Tiger T-136 of Ranthambore National Park has been clicked around 100km from home, and barely 8km from the Kuno enclosure where the cheetahs from Africa were first released in September last year.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoOfficers from MP forest department and WII researchers were able to get stunning photographs as the tiger lingered in one spot for hours. 
In May this year, the forest department had found clear pugmarks of the tiger in Basantpura area, an unfenced region towards Palpur East, 5km from the cheetah enclosure. 
Officers say the tiger has not come close to any human settlement nor posed any threat to any of the species in the area, including cheetahs.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreT-136 had crossed the Rajasthan border and entered Morena in Madhya Pradesh in November last year. The Rajasthan forest department had informed its MP counterparts about its movement. After leaving Ranthambore, the tiger wandered near human settlements close to Gangapur before reaching Dholpur forest close to the MP border.
The tiger's arrival at Kuno wasn't surprising as it was on a tiger migration corridor, said officials. In 2020, tiger T-38 had returned to Ranthambore via this route, nearly a decade after crossing the Chambal ravines and venturing into the Kuno-Palpur area of Madhya Pradesh.
Other than the presence of the tiger, the depleting prey base is turning out to be a major concern for Project Cheetah. The steering committee has submitted a report saying that at the time of introduction of cheetahs, Kuno had sufficient prey base to support around 21 cheetahs and other carnivores in the area. However, an increase in the predator population had an impact on certain prey species and even the habitat.
The response of the prey species to a new predator was to be monitored by the research team to understand the dynamics and the need for supplementation of prey (such as chital and nilgai). Officers were asked to take action on the basis of annual assessments.
As per the action plan, prey base should have been estimated on 'distance sampling' (both foot transects and camera trap-based), and efforts were to be made to estimate prey abundance in the larger Kuno landscape (3,200 sq km) at least once every two years. Officials fear that a low prey base can trigger clashes between predators.
Kuno lost 30% of the 20 translocated cheetahs in a four-month period earlier this year. Three of the first four cheetah cubs born here died too.
The forest and environment ministry has clarified that five cheetahs died due to natural causes, dismissing reports that cheetahs Tejas and Suraj had succumbed to septicaemia caused by neck injuries from collar rubbing. Such reports lacked scientific evidence and were speculative, the ministry insisted.
Several measures are on the anvil to support Project Cheetah, including establishing a Cheetah Protection Force and a research centre with facilities for rescue, rehabilitation, capacity building, and interpretation. Additional forest areas are to be brought under the administrative control of Kuno National Park, more frontline staff will be deployed, and a second home for cheetahs will be created in Gandhi Sagar Wildlife Sanctuary in MP.
To ensure effective management, the Union government has deployed a dedicated team from the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) to work closely with field officials. This team will analyze real-time data collected by monitoring teams to make key decisions. TNN