KOZHIKODE: State govt on Tuesday announced constituting district-level monitoring committees to deal with straying wild animals and bearing treatment costs of victims in private hospitals among a slew of measures to address the human-wildlife conflict in Wayanad. The decisions were taken after an all-party meeting attended by a cabinet subcommittee of revenue, forest and local self-govt ministers who visited the district.
The UDF, however, boycotted the meeting demanding Saseendran's resignation and accusing the government of cheating people by holding mere discussions.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoGovt had faced widespread criticism after back-to-back loss of lives in wild animal attacks in Wayanad. No minister had visited the district so far despite huge protests, in stark contrast to visits by MP Rahul Gandhi and governor Arif Mohammed Khan this week.
The other announcements included conflict mitigation efforts, steps towards eco-restoration of forests and steps to raise compensation to victims. The ministers said 15 of 27 decisions taken at a meeting chaired by chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan earlier had been implemented.
Revenue minister K Rajan said the district-level monitoring committees with district collector as convenor would have MLAs, district panchayat president, LSGD joint director, forest special officer as members besides four representatives from LDF, three from UDF and one from BJP. The committee will meet once every two weeks and monitor progress in decisions taken.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe panel, however, didn't give any concrete assurance on adequate treatment facilities at Mananthavady medical college. Similar people's committees will be constituted at LSG and ward levels, with ST promoters, Kudumbashree members and Asha workers monitoring fencing and other mitigation measures in forest borders.