Bhubaneswar: Day after the survey by the wildlife wing of the state forest department showed a 50% increase in tiger count from the National Tiger Conservation Authority’s estimation of 20, the department has sent a proposal for introduction of a few female big cats from central India to Similipal Tiger Reserve in Mayurbhanj district for genetic variation. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Similipal Tiger Reserve is known for its melanistic tigers. The reason for sending the proposal to NTCA, wildlife officials said, is to check in-breeding in Similipal and infuse fresh blood into the gene pool. Officials claimed this is a scientific approach that would be able to sustain big cat population in Similipal in the future. 
Wildlife experts have been apprehending that in-breeding could lead to the collapse of the tiger population in the habitat spread over 2,750 square kilometres.
On Monday, the state govt released its own tiger estimation report that pegged Similipal’s big cat count alone at 27. Of this, 24 have been seen in camera trap. There are 10 males and 14 females. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo“We have proposed that approval be granted to introduce a few female tigers to maintain a healthy sex ratio. This will gradually check in-breeding and in the long run, a new gene pool will be created. It has been well researched that tigers from central India landscape can be suitable mates for Similipal’s resident tigers,” Susanta Nanda, chief wildlife warden, explained. 
In case of Similipal’s melanistic tigers, while some wildlife experts believe they are just another kind, born out of a new gene pool, there is no research as to whether they are weaker than the normal Royal Bengal Tigers. However, Similipal has offered little scope for its tigers to mate with big cats of neighbouring reserve because of its isolated topography.
Similipal field director Prakash Gogineni said usually it has been found that two females to one male is a suitable ratio in case of tigers. “In case of introducing tigers, it is always better to bring females. If we have three-four more females, it will be good,” Gogineni explained. He said Similipal has the country’s best protection system with 240 anti-poaching camps. “The entire landscape has multi-layer protection measures in place. When the landscape is secure, the tigers are safe,” Gogineni added.
The wildlife wing also decided to have tiger estimation every year to keep tabs on dispersal of tigers, their growth, territory coverage, prey density and breeding. 
However, Odisha’s tryst with introduction of tigers from other states has not been good. A male tiger MB2 and female tiger Sundari had been introduced in Satkosia in 2018 to revive the habitat there. Satkosia had no big cats. While MB2 was allegedly killed by poachers, Sundari had turned into a man-eater, forcing the state govt to return it to Bandhavgarh in Madhya Pradesh, from where it was brought.