AHMEDABAD: In what requires a lion's share of attention, the state that prides itself on being the only abode of Asiatic lions has only four wildlife veterinarians to attend to big cats. 
Gujarat has recorded 555 lion deaths due to natural and unnatural causes in the past five years. And yet, for the past five years, 14 of the 18 sanctioned permanent posts of doctors have been lying vacant in the state's wildlife care centres in Gir and Greater Gir areas including Bhavnagar, Junagadh, Gir Somnath and Amreli, according to data tabled in the state assembly.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
The state is home to 674 lions according to the last census. And going by the vacancies, there is only one vet available for around 200 lions and other wild animals in Gir and surrounding areas whereas, ideally, there should be one vet for 30 big cats since they are required to travel long distances to attend to a sick or injured animal.
The matter, said sources, has been back-burnered following a tussle between the veterinary and the forest departments. So far, it was the veterinary department that had been sending its staff on deputation to the forest department.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo However, the staff had little interest in treating wild animals since it is markedly different from treating domestic animals, said sources.
Some of them did not even know how to use tranquilizer guns to sedate wild animals and hence forest department had to train its rescue force for the purpose. "If a tranquilizer shot misses a lion or a leopard, the animal can attack the team of officials.
Vets needed in Nalsarovar too 
 In the past, training veterinarians was not viable because of their frequent transfers. So, the department decided to set up its own team of doctors and that is how 18 posts of wildlife vets were sanctioned," said a forest department official. "The state government has hired 13 veterinary doctors on contract, but these are from the veterinary department," he said.
Principal chief conservator of forest, U D Singh, said, "The issue pertaining to vacancies was brought to the notice of the state wildlife board. CM Bhupendra Patel asked us to speed up the hiring process on an urgent basis. We have now formed our own set of rules and sent them for approval. Once we get a go ahead, the department will approach Gujarat Public Service Commission to conduct the recruitment of wildlife vets. The matter is top priority for us."
Vansda MLA Anantkumar Patel, who had raised the issue regarding the vacancies in the assembly this week, said, "I wanted to draw the attention of the government to the absence of veterinary facilities in Dang and other areas. Several incidents of leopard cubs suffering burns have been reported but in the absence of wildlife doctors, the animals are left to die. We do not know where to take them for treatment." At present, sick and injured lions and leopards are taken to Sasan, Sakkarbaug zoo, Rampara or Jasadhar. Chief wildlife warden Nityanand Srivastava said that in the absence of permanent wildlife doctors, they have hired part-time veterinarians through the Lion Conservation Society. These doctors are paid Rs 25,000 per month.
Explaining why it is difficult to find trained vets for wildlife care centres, a senior officer told TOI that trained vets prefer the dairy sector since they are paid handsomely by the dairy units. Besides, there is no risk involved there which is not the case when it comes to wildlife.
Even Nalsarovar, Khijadiya, Velavadar and wild ass sanctuary in the Greater Rann of Kutch do not have permanent veterinarians for migratory birds, blackbucks and other wildlife, the officer said.