Thiruvananthapuram: In the wake of repeated incidents of human-wildlife conflict, the chief secretary has instructed the forests and wildlife department to seek permission from the Centre to kill those wild animals that are repeatedly causing danger to human lives, and also to construct water storage facilities inside the forests in the state, with the help of beneficiaries of employment guarantee schemes.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
In the written instructions by chief secretary V Venu to the additional chief secretary (forests and wildlife) K R Jyothilal, accessed by TOI, it has been asked to assess the number of water sources inside the forests constructed by the forests department, and the places where there is likelihood of drought inside the forests in the upcoming summer season. It has also been instructed to examine if water can be transported to the forest areas where there is scarcity of water. “Immediate measures have to be taken to construct check dams, ponds, etc. inside the forest. If required, the services of the beneficiaries of employment guarantee schemes and the local population who are interested in such activities can be availed,” it said. 
Instructions have also been given to avail permission from the Centre to kill those wild animals that are repeatedly causing damage to the life and properties. 
Another important instruction that has been given to the forest department is to verify the safety precautions that have been put in place in the resorts inside the jungle and those in the periphery of the jungle areas. An observation has also been made that in several places, the resorts are providing jungle safaris using jeeps, and those travelling in the night time are causing severe disturbance to the wildlife. Strong lights, loud noises and human presence inside the forests are causing severe disturbance to the wildlife, it said. In addition, alighting from the vehicles, consuming food inside forest areas and throwing food wastes are also causing severe disturbance to the wildlife, triggering them to move out of their habitats to the human inhabited areas. Sources said that such activities will be restricted hereafter, and as an immediate measure, the night jungle safari has already been banned in Idukki.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoClaims have been made by the govt that as part of eco-restoration programme, several steps are being taken to create more water bodies, check dams, replacing foreign trees like acacia and eucalyptus from regions inside the forest with local trees like wild mango trees, bamboo and Indian gooseberry. But the scarcity of funds has been causing hindrance to such activities. 
As per the figures of the state planning board, though 92 schemes have been formulated with a total outlay of Rs 299.65 crore, the expenditure till March 8 is only Rs 113.32 crore (37.82%). With only three more weeks remaining for the financial year to come to a close, not even 50% of the schemes are likely to be implemented.