GUWAHATI: In an extraordinary accomplishment, wildlife veterinarians and animal keepers at the Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC) in Kaziranga, in collaboration with the forest department, have successfully hand-raised and rewilded an orphaned wild buffalo calf at Burachapori Wildlife Sanctuary.
The sanctuary comes under the jurisdiction of Kaziranga National Park & Tiger Reserve (KNPTR).
The young buffalo was admitted to the centre on January 20, 2020. This feat marks a significant milestone in the conservation efforts of the CWRC and the forest department as they have demonstrated the feasibility of nurturing and reintroducing orphaned wild animals back into their natural habitats.
The global population of Asiatic wild buffalo (Bubalus arnee) has been estimated at approximately 3,400 individuals, with an astonishing 95% residing in India, primarily in Assam. Boasting an estimated population of over 2,600, the world’s single largest congregation of this magnificent species can be found within the confines of KNPTR.
Chief minister Himanta Biswa Sarma shared this heartening news via social media, “In Jan 2020, a one-day-old wild buffalo calf was rescued by officials of @assamforest and was nurtured for 4 years at CWRC, Kaziranga. Yesterday, it was released back to the wild, marking another significant step in rescue and rehabilitation efforts for our precious wildlife.”
KNPTR director Sonali Ghosh said, “Rescue and rehabilitation of young animals is extremely challenging as they need specialised humanised parental care. However, it needs to be ensured that no attachment to human beings/ imprinting takes place so that they can be rewilded eventually. The wild buffalo calf brings a beacon of hope as the animal keepers and vets of CWRC got a chance to nurture a very young animal successfully and release it back into the wild where she truly belongs.”
KNPTR officials said the rehabilitation process has been meticulously carried out in accordance with the conservation translocation protocols established by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) and the Central Zoo Authority (CZA). “At present, the animal is under constant surveillance of the frontline teams of Burachapori Wildlife Sanctuary and CWRC. She has been kept in the soft-release enclosure,” an official said, adding, “This juvenile, now nearly four years old, was triumphantly reintroduced to its natural habitat at Burachapori Wildlife Sanctuary on May 28.