GUWAHATI: A day after two brothers, who were suspected to be poachers, were shot dead inside the Laokhowa Wildlife Sanctuary in Nagaon district, chief minister Himanta Biswa Sarma on Sunday ordered the state chief secretary to constitute an inquiry commission to thoroughly investigate the matter.
Following the CM's order, the Nagaon district magistrate Narendra Shah has entrusted additional district magistrate Sudeep Nath to start a detailed inquiry into the incident under the guidelines of the National Human Rights Commission.Nath's inquiry will find out the actual facts and circumstances leading to the death of Abdul Jalil (40) and Sameer Uddin (35). Shah also asked Nath to complete the probe within 10 days and submit the report with all relevant and supporting documents within the period.
The magistrate also directed other departments concerned to aid the inquiry officer and provide necessary assistance and access to relevant documents.
According to the forest department, the incident happened after it sent out a patrolling team following a tip-off and found that a group of about 15-20 people entered the sanctuary on Friday night. When confronted, the group attacked the patrolling team after which the team fired in self-defence. An official of the department had said, "Two individuals sustained bullet injuries in the firing while others fled. The injured were taken to the Nagaon Civil Hospital, where the doctors declared them dead."
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe deceased brothers were residents of Dhingbori Chapori village of Nagaon's Juria area. 
Later, the divisional forest officer of the Nagaon Wildlife Division-cum-deputy director of the Kaziranga Tiger Reserve submitted a report to magistrate Shah about the firing incident that took place near the Rowmari Beel under the Gorajan range of the wildlife sanctuary, an area under the Juria police station. 
Sources also said the reason why the group of people, particularly the deceased brothers, entered the sanctuary would be known only after a detailed investigation. The sources added that fishing equipment were seized from the victims.