Bigg Boss 7 fame Gauahar Khan and her husband Zaid Darbar are enjoying a delightful breakfast surrounded by giraffes during their trip to Tanzania. Taking to her Instagram handle, Gauahar Khan shared candid photos of their fun-filled experience amidst nature and wildlife.
Gauahar Khan, a well-known personality in the entertainment industry, not only impresses fans with her hosting skills but also maintains an active social media presence.PollBigg Boss OTT 3: Payal Malik gets eliminated; was it fair?NoYesShe often treats her admirers to candid glimpses of her life. Currently, she and her husband, Zaid Darbar, are having a wonderful time in Tanzania, sharing several posts on Instagram from their vacation.

In one of her posts, Gauahar gave her followers a virtual tour of the lush greenery she witnessed, including a video of her feeding zebras and giraffes. She shared a string of photos showing her enjoying breakfast in the wild, surrounded by the beautiful backdrop of giraffes. Gauahar and Zaid are seen sitting at an outdoor breakfast table, enjoying the serenity of Tanzania's wildlife. In the caption, the ex-Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa 11 host wrote, "Breakfast: Tanzania style. The people of Tanzania are beautiful and warm! We are just so blessed. Alhamdulillah. Setting trends."
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndo
The photos from her international vacation also include pictures with a lion, where Gauahar is seen radiating delight as she poses fearlessly near the majestic animal. She captioned the post, "The king !"
Fans reacted enthusiastically to the interesting and unusual breakfast photos from Gauahar's Tanzania trip. One netizen commented, "It's looks AI for a moment but must be amazing experience." Another user wrote, "I think Zehaan was scared of those giraffes @gauaharkhan missing you zehaaannn." Another user expressed, "The most beautiful pic on Instagram today enjoy!"

For those who might not know, Gauahar Khan and Zaid Darbar got engaged in November 2020 and tied the knot on December 25 of the same year. They welcomed their son on May 10, 2023, naming him Zehaan. On the professional front, Gauahar was last seen hosting Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa 11 alongside Rithvik Dhanjani.
Daisy Shah: Prefer Ghar Ka Khana Hote Hue Bhi, 'Bahar Ka Khaana'
Here are the photos from Gauahar's Instagram for a closer look at her dreamy Tanzanian adventure.