Ensuring that every citizen gets their fair right to vote is no mean task in a state like Uttar Pradesh. With a terrain that spans hills, lakes, wildlife sanctuaries, massive rivers, valleys, the Election Commission has to put in serious effort to reach every last booth.
A prime example of that is the Bharatpur village in Bahraich district where polling was held on Monday (May 13).PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoWith just 490 voters, the booth is located in the core of the Kataraniaghat Sanctuary, the route to which is affected by wild tuskers and leopards.
An official in the district said that the Bharatpur village is located in Mihinpurwa tehsil of Bahraich District, close to the India-Nepal border. It is situated 120 km away from district headquarters and is spread over an area of 1,107 hectare. Of the total population, 273 are males, while 2,017 are females.
“This is an extremely difficult booth to reach. The only way to reach Bharatpur is an arduous boat ride over the crocodile-infested Gerua river. After the boat ride comes another challenge, a long seven-km walk through the Katarniaghat sanctuary to reach the remotest village. This stretch is also affected by the terror of wild tuskers and leopards,” the official said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoThe booth also falls in a communication shadow area and conducting awareness programmes for voters for a nearly inaccessible population is a challenging task, the official said, adding that along with this, rendering the polling party to the booth on polling day is also difficult.
“Despite this, every election has seen safe polls here. The population in the booth is mixed, including tribals from the Nepal border and people from Purvanchal, who have been coming and settling here for the last 10-15 years. We are trying to relocate them so that in the next election, we can shut down this booth,” the official said.
Sanjay Kumar Singh, district magistrate of Pilibhit, where polling was held in the first phase on April 19, said that the district has several booths touching the tiger territory but for years, the Election Commission and local administration have ensured that there is no untoward incident. In Kalinagar tehsil, there are 27 booths in 22 villages in the Puranpur and Barkheda assembly constituencies which are affected by tigers.
There are eight voting centres in Mahof Range and another six in Mala Range which are under the tiger range. A senior official in the district said that despite this, all precautions are taken to ensure that there are no tiger attacks.
Recounting an incident when he himself was new to the district and encountered a tiger during an official inspection, the official said that his juniors informed him that tigers usually do not attack people in groups and hence it is ensured that polling teams are always in large groups of 10 or more.
In Pilibhit, there are at least two booths from where voters need to undertake a boat ride to be able to cast their vote.
In Lakhimpur, several such booths exist which officials can only access by crossing through neighbouring district.
 There is a booth which is 105 km away from district headquarters which can be accessed only through Bahraich. It takes about 3.5 hours to get there from the district headquarters. Some booths in Pratapur can also be accessed through Bahraich. Isapur and Sainapur booths can also only be accessed through Sitapur.