In a ruling on March 6, The Supreme Court of India banned tiger safaris within the core area of the Jim Corbett National Park in Uttarakhand. According to the Court, the decision was passed after some forest officials and political members of the State planned to expand the scope of tiger safaris “under the pretext of promotion of tourism” which led to the felling of about 6,000 trees in the protected forest.PollDo you believe in the concept of karma?NoYes
What does the ban impose?
The ban specifies that tiger safaris will be permitted only in the peripheral and buffer zones surrounding the park. The bench, comprising Justice BR Gavai, Justice PK Mishra, and Justice Sandeep Mehta, also addressed that various resorts near the park often played loud music and threatened the wildlife. “The approach must be of eco-centrism and not of anthropocentrism. The precautionary principle must be applied to ensure that the least amount of environmental damage is caused,” the court directed.
“The presence of tigers in the forests is an indicator of the well-being of the ecosystem. Unless steps are taken for the protection of tigers, the ecosystem which revolves around tigers cannot be protected. Events like illegal construction and illicit felling of trees like the one in Corbett cannot be ignored” — Justice B.R. Gavai, who was part of the three-judge Bench
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo(Image: Pexels)
How does the ban affect tiger safaris?
Joydeep Mondal, founder of the tour agency Wildchasers India, clarifies that the ban has only been imposed in the Pakhro range of Jim Corbett National Park. “Safaris have been banned in that particular area because of unsanctioned tree-felling activities to make new safari routes. The other core zones of Jim Corbett are still open to tourists,” says Joydeep, adding, “Tiger safaris have been a channel of conservation for a long time. They are also important to document the health of tigers. If we spot a tiger with an injury and report it to the right authorities, help is provided at a swifter pace which also increases the survival chances of the tiger.”
“Tiger safaris are important because guides and poachers who are now conservation workers have stable jobs and this in itself helps avoid malpractices and conserves the forest” — Joydeep Mondal
Guidelines for safaris
Justice Gavai also disagreed with Section 9 of the 2016 NTCA guidelines which said that only tigers exhibited in zoos, injured tigers that were treated, conflict tigers or orphaned cubs that were “unfit for re-wilding and released into the wild” should be put on the safaris. The tigers should be sourced from the same landscape where the safari was established. The judgment also emphasised that tiger safaris should be established following all precautionary principles to cause the least amount of damage to the environment.