Dehradun/Rudrapur/Nainital: Issues are raised and promises made in successive electoral campaigns but once elected, politicians forget them, say residents in Nainital-Udham Singh Nagar seat, which covers large swathes of Kumaon hills and the Terai area. The seat was won by BJP in the last two general elections. Ajay Bhatt, minister of state in the Modi govt, is the sitting MP from the constituency.Before him, former Maharashtra governor Bhagat Singh Koshyari represented the seat from 2014 to 2019.
In Udham Singh Nagar district, the hub of industrial and agricultural activities, people say that connectivity remains a big issue. “We’ve seen the area’s evolution into a special economic zone, housing over five lakh inhabitants. However, our advancement is impeded by insufficient rail and air connectivity. Better transportation infrastructure is urgently required to maintain economic growth and ease travel for residents and businesses alike. Rudrapur needs improved railway connections to major urban centres and the establishment of an airport for regular flight services,” said Nitin Gava, an industrialist.
Concerns are also raised by the farming community of the district, which is also known as the rice bowl of Uttarakhand. “As a small-scale farmer, I struggle with market access and lack of govt support. I hope the next MP and govt will work towards establishing market linkages for farmers like me and provide subsidies for agricultural inputs to improve our livelihoods,” said Vikram Jeet Singh, a farmer from Bigwada village.
Speaking about lack of healthcare and education facilities, local resident Manish Kumar told TOI, “I’ve experienced firsthand the deficiencies in healthcare and education. We urgently need improved facilities. Better healthcare services will address pressing medical needs, while upgraded educational infrastructure will empower our youth for success. I urge our elected representative to prioritise these essential sectors.”
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe issue of human-wildlife conflict is common to both Nainital and US Nagar districts. According to Rajeev Lochan Sah, a Nainital resident, the regions spanning hilly areas of Nainital to the Bhabar and Terai belt are grappling with human-wildlife conflicts. “Every year, individuals fall victim to attacks by leopards, elephants, tigers, wild boars, and bears. In addition to wildlife threats, stray animals pose a threat by damaging farmers’ crops. These issues should be addressed at the earliest,” Sah said.
Moreover, in recent years, natural disasters have also emerged as a source of distress for farmers, he added.
Then, the problem of traffic during summer season cripples life in Nainital town. Kartikay Hari Gupta, advocate at Nainital high court, said, “Addressing the unregulated surge of tourist vehicles through the implementation of entry or environmental taxes is a crucial policy domain where future legislators should focus their efforts, as it has been a significant issue. Simply widening roads, as observed in Delhi, isn’t an effective solution, as wider roads haven’t alleviated traffic congestion there. It’s imperative to dissuade individuals from bringing private vehicles into Nainital.”
Prem Kulyal, resident of Jangaliyagau in Bhimtal block, added that the condition of roads in majority of the Nainital constituency are in a very poor condition and are becoming a cause for frequent accidents. Kulyal said they have written a letter to the CM as well and have mentioned that they are going to “boycott the 2024 polls”.
The Nainital-Udham Singh Nagar parliamentary constituency has 14 assembly segments --eight won by BJP and six by Congress in the last assembly polls, setting the stage for an interesting contest in the upcoming elections.
(With inputs from Sonali Mishra & Aakash Ahuja)