JAISALMER: Six naturally laid Great Indian Bustard (GIB) eggs were found in the Desert National Park (DNP) and Ramdevra enclosure, signalling yet another success for the project to save the endangered species by the Wildlife Institute of India (WII) and DNP. Four of these eggs were found in DNP and two in Ramdevra.

One of them has already hatched. Additionally, two new chicks of male GIB Tony and female Sharky hatched in captive breeding, bringing the total number of chicks to eight.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThese chicks are healthy and are being monitored by scientists. 
With these additions, the GIB population under captive breeding at the Sudasari Sam Breeding Centre in DNP has risen to 37. Ashish Vyas, deputy conservator of forest at DNP, said that there could be four more eggs. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoAccording to Vyas, the breeding season for GIBs is from April to October. Two years ago, 13 chicks had hatched, and, so far this season, six eggs have been laid and two others hatched.
In a recent wildlife census conducted on the Baisakh full moon at waterholes, 64 GIBs were spotted. There could be more in the field firing range, where a census has not been conducted for the past six years, he said, adding it was required to get the actual number. Currently, there are over 70 enclosures where female GIBs mate in a safe environment, increasing breeding, he said.
Forest dept staff keep 24-hour watch 
"A large number of female GIBs may breed during the upcoming monsoon season. The security of the closure has been enhanced. Department employees keep a 24-hour watch to ensure that no other bird or animal damages the eggs. One employee is assigned to each egg," he said.
WII has signed an MoU with the International Fund for Houbara Conservation in Abu Dhabi to increase the number of GIBs under the conservation and breeding programme. The project is being spearheaded by scientist Dr Suthirtho Dutta, with the DNP team providing assistance.