BENGALURU: Nearly a decade after sighting a ‘white’ sambar deer (Rusa unicolor) in Bandipur, wildlife researchers have documented the presence of yet another leucistic sambar deer in the Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary.
Considered as the first recorded photographic documentation of this unique fauna, the presence of leucistic sambar has caught the attention of conservationists.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Studying the leopard population of Karnataka, wildlife researchers led by conservation scientist Dr Sanjay Gubbi set up camera traps in the Sangama range of Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary. 
While retrieving the images from the camera traps last month, the researchers were able to identify the presence of leucistic sambar deer. In two images, the female sambar was seen accompanying another adult female sambar. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe researchers from the Nature Conservation Foundation and Holematti Nature Foundation speculated that this could be a sub-adult individual with its mother. Karnataka’s first recorded ‘white’ deer was previously reported at Bandipur Tiger Reserve in 2014.
An official release from the researchers said, “Leucism is a condition in which the pigmentation of an animal’s skin is missing, causing white or pale skin. This condition can occur naturally from birth due to a phenotype (a trait of any living being) that may have formed from a defect in the animal’s development. 
It is different from albinism which is a condition that arises due to a lack of melatonin in the animal’s skin, but the animal has pink or reddish eyes. But in leucism, the animal lacks the pink eyes.”
Reacting to the findings of leucistic sambar deer, Sanjay Gubbi said, “Photographic data like this can offer us many insights into the biology of these herbivore populations, which remains to be explored and also in their ecology. Sambar is also listed as a vulnerable species as per the IUCN Red List, so it is imperative that we continue to study them and such unique occurrences.” Interestingly, the team had previously documented an albino dhole (Cuonalpinus) in the same landscape.