PUNE: Rapid urbanisation and changing pattern of land use are leading to a sharp decline in the population of Indian Grey Wolves in the grassland patches of Saswad, Jejuri, Baramati and Morgaon in the district, said experts from a charitable trust working towards conservation of wildlife in grassland and scrubland habitats.
While monitoring the breeding cycle of the wolves - ranging from November to January - in 2023 and 2024, The Grasslands Trust came across quite a few discrepancies.In 2023, five different packs of wolves reproduced 31 pups, with almost all of them surviving and dispersing into new landscapes. The trust, however, found only two packs out of the five present in the region participated in the breeding season of 2024.
"In the 2022-23 breeding cycle, we had tracked 15 wolves - two adults and 13 pups - in a single frame that could be identified as a pack. Previously, there were only a few records of pack sizes larger than 10 to 12 wolves. These wolves survived their first year and dispersed. However, 13 of the pups from the same pair have now disappeared from the landscape," said Mihir Godbole, founder of The Grasslands Trust.
Experts are of the view that a lot of packs are now showing a tendency to not breed or have shifted from Pune because of the increase in "human-alterations to their habitats". 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoExpert: Townships not helping wolves 
 In Pune district, most of the grassland patches are in Saswad, Jejuri, Baramati, Solapur and Morgaonon. Some of the land patches are privately owned, while some belong to the forest department. On the private holdings, development activities, such as construction of townships, are of late becoming too frequent, leading to garbage dumps.
"The canids feel threatened by human interference. It is unfavourable for them to live or breed under such circumstances. Moreover, garbage dump yards attract dogs, which tend to become a big threat to the wolves as disease carriers. The wolf population in our study area is under immense threat with not more than 15 or 20 breeding adult wolves present," said Godbole.
The wolf pups are also not surviving due to the change in the use of land pattern. The first year of these animals remains to be extremely sensitive, during which they end up interacting with disease-carrying dogs over sharing food or humans. This causes canine distemper (a fatal disease), while some of them also die because of deliberate poisoning by human beings. 
The trust, in collaboration with the forest department, now plans to conduct two projects to ensure that the wolf population does not dwindle further.
"Absence of any precaution might lead to local extinction of the (wolf) packs. Even if there are wolves that would like to settle, it will be difficult for them to navigate through these human-dominant landscapes. We have to work to protect these breeding sites," said Godbole.
Wildlife Aditya Paranjape said, "We are trying to help restructure the habitat and provide support for the population to thrive. We are formulating the proposal and shall soon start working in that direction."