DEHRADUN: The Uttarakhand high court, while disposing of a PIL in a case involving the deaths of three women killed by a "man-eater big cat" in Bhimtal this month, said on Thursday that the "animal should be first identified and then tranquilised". It also said that "if it is not possible to trap and cage an identified man-eater, it may be killed on the recommendation of the chief wildlife warden (CWW) following the Wildlife (Protection) Act...PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoIf a wild animal attacks a person, he/she can kill it in self-defence."
The high court, however, observed that "if an attack has occurred, the real culprit must be identified to ensure that no innocent wild animal is killed."
The government, meanwhile, told the court that the tigress that killed the women had been “identified and tranquilised”. Incidentally, having taken suo motu cognisance of CWW’s orders of hunting the man-eater, the court had on December 14 directed the CWW to explain how the order to kill an animal under Schedule 1 category was issued without resorting to the steps provided as per the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972. On December 21, the court instructed the CWW to form a panel led by wildlife expert Dr Parag Nigam to determine whether the threat in question was a tiger or a leopard. 
The forest department later informed the court that the “tigress responsible for recent attacks was tranquilised and captured at Tauk Nauli of Jangaliya village in Bhimtal block on Monday (December 25)”. The team then transported the animal to Rani Bagh rescue centre. DNA analysis confirmed that a tiger was responsible for the first two kills, the forest department subsequently said. Forest officials suspect the particular tigress to be behind the killing of all three women in the area in 13 days (between December 7 and 20). On December 7, Indira Devi of Maluvatal gram sabha under Bhimtal development block was killed by a tiger. Two days later, Pushpa Devi in Pinro village was killed in another ambush. On December 20, Nikita Sharma was attacked and mauled to death by an “unknown animal” in nearby Tada village.