THIRUVANANTPURAM: In the wake of frequently reported incidents of human-wildlife conflicts from across the state in the last few days, the cabinet decided to declare the conflict as a state-specific disaster.
With this, state disaster management authority (SDMA's) activities will also be made part of various remedial measures. Four committees will be set up at the ministerial, official, district and local levels.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe apex committee will be chaired by the chief minister, wherein ministers in charge of forests and wildlife, revenue, local self-government and SC,ST and OBC development departments will be members. The chief secretary will be the convener of this committee. The committee will control overall matters and will ensure smooth coordination between various departments.
Another committee chaired by the chief secretary and consisting of home, revenue, forests, SC,ST and OBC development, local self-government and agriculture secretaries, PCCF and head of forest force, PCCF and chief wildlife warden and the member-secretary of SDMA will supervise and instruct the implementation of various programmes. In addition, two other committees - one headed by the minister in charge of the district and consisting of the district collector and other officials, and at the local body level - will also function to implement various measures at the respective levels..
A control room with necessary communication equipment will be set up at the forest headquarters under the control of the chief wildlife warden. Social media groups will be set up in places having threats of wild animal attacks to issue warnings and advisories to the public. The cabinet also decided to deploy more temporary forest watchers where the human wildlife conflicts are widely reported. Owners of plantations close to forest regions will be requested to be part of activities to reduce human-wildlife conflicts, and they will be asked to clean up the area by removing bushes and other wild plant growths.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoThe cabinet decided to ensure enough water sources are created inside the forest regions to reduce incidents of animals from leaving forests to human inhabitations in search of food and water. Govt decided to provide an additional Rs 110 crore besides the already sanctioned Rs 100 crore through KIIFB to reduce human-wildlife conflicts. Inter-state coordination committees will meet periodically to coordinate activities of the three states (Kerala, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu) in reducing human-wildlife conflicts, the cabinet decided. The cabinet ratified extension for another year the order listing guidelines for eliminating wild boars destroying life and properties of humans..