CHANDIGARH: In a bid to address the growing monkey menace in Chandigarh, the municipal corporation has implemented a new strategy involving deployment of four mimickers/rescue operators. The city's worst affected areas have been divided into two zones, with two mimickers assigned to each zone. They are responsible for monitoring six sectors or villages.
"They will keep a vigil in their designated zones as per the newly issued roster.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThey will make rounds of areas and when monkeys are spotted, they will take steps to scare them away. The mimickers make langur calls, which scares the monkeys," said sources.
The mimickers will also be dispatched to various parts of the city on the basis of complaints received from residents. 
They will also be tasked with assessing the number of monkeys in each area. The monkey menace has been a persistent problem in Chandigarh, especially in Sector 8, where they disrupt daily life and pose a significant risks to residents.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoThe MC has taken on the task following the removal of monkeys from the protected list under the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 (as amended in 2022), a responsibility previously held by the UT forest department. Residents are still unsure about who to contact when monkeys cause disruptions. "People still end up contacting the forest department, which shrugs off the responsibility saying that it no longer falls under its domain," said sources.
Although the MC was given the responsibility of managing the monkey menace last September, it has struggled in the absence of trained and dedicated staff. "So, the MC decided to improve its capacity to deal with the menace. The civic body also plans to deploy more staff to deal with the problem. Better training and equipment are also planned.
Feeding monkeys will be discouraged
Options other than scaring away monkeys are also being examined. Complaint numbers will be shared in the near future for people to contact the municipal corporation,” said sources. The department of forest and wildlife carried out a census in December 2022 with the primary goal of accurately determining the monkey population and pinpointing locations where the primates are concentrated, besides investigating the underlying causes of the issue. 
“Monkey populations were found to be higher in sectors close to forests or which have dense tree cover as compared to other sectors. They often venture into nearby residential areas to find food but quickly retreat to the safety of wooded areas,” said sources. Ease of finding food is one of the main factors contributing to the increased monkey population in certain areas. 
In some places, people actively feed monkeys, which attracts them in large numbers. Additionally, in areas with numerous eateries, such as markets, monkeys tend to congregate due to availability of leftover food on plates or in dustbins. “The municipal corporationwill also be putting up information boards in different locations of the city to warn people against feeding monkeys,” said sources.