AGRA: Lakshmi, the 'skinniest elephant in the country' when it was rescued from Madhya Pradesh in Dec 2021, is now on the verge of being declared overweight. She is put on a 'girth watchlist'. Weighing 2,900kg upon rescue from a life where she was deployed for begging and commercial use, the 33-year-old pachyderm suffered from chronic arthritis and joint deformities.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoShe was tagged as the skinniest jumbo in the country by People for Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) India which conducted a joint operation with animal rescue NGO, Wildlife SOS to get her freed. Lakshmi found permanent rehabilitation at the Wildlife SOS Elephant Conservation and Care Centre (ECCC) in Mathura.
In the two years since her rescue, Lakshmi has transformed, adding almost 240 kg more, and now weighs 3,140kg. Dr Ilayaraja S, deputy director (veterinary services) at Wildlife SOS, said, "Lakshmi was debilitated by chronic pain and suffering from long-term deprivation of food and water. Through necessary medical treatment and a nutritious diet, she has overcome her condition."
Lakshmi received specialised care, including a sandpit to alleviate arthritic pain, a mud pile for comfortable resting, and a bamboo stand for resting her head and trunk. She was provided with a customised jacket for warmth, besides daily grooming and massage to improve blood circulation. Her diet includes 12kg of fruits, 120kg of fodder, ghee, porridge, peanuts and pulses. Besides, supplementation of multivitamins and minerals and liver tonic is also provided to her.
The flip side of her weight gain is that it is putting extra pressure on her lower body which still hasn't healed. Ilayaraja said, "There is a deformity in Lakshmi's legs caused due to excessive exploitation for begging and commercial use. We are trying to keep her weight in check as any further increase can restricted her mobility."
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoLakshmi's story resonates with another rescued elephant, Pari, who also suffered abuse and exploitation. Despite their painful pasts, the bond between Lakshmi and Pari blossomed at the rescue centre, bringing comfort and healing to both.