HYDERABAD: The recent cases of tiger poisoning in Asifabad forest have exposed several shortcomings in wildlife management in Telangana. Lack of synergy between the wildlife wing and territorial offices in sanctuaries notwithstanding, failure to fill forest officer posts and other vacancies in the tiger reserves is another major issue.
Apart from non-payment of salaries to tiger trackers and delay in paying compensation for cattle kills, foresters mention several reasons in their findings while looking into the reasons behind the death of two tigers in Kagaznagar corridor.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
A top forest official submitted a damning report on how the wildlife wing has become non-existent over the years. Until a few months ago, the state did not have a full-time chief wildlife warden. 
"Since the formation of Telangana, there has been no regular officer holding the key post of chief wildlife warden and only six months ago, a regular chief wildlife warden was posted," he said in the report. "Every time a tiger mortality happens, action is taken against subordinate officers without taking concrete long-term measures towards improvement of forests and wildlife protection. In the past 10 years, the department is giving priority to showcase planting activity while neglecting wildlife and forest protection which are its core activities," the report mentioned.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoRelocation of villages in the core area is not happening and hence tigers are retained in the corridor i.e., Kagaznagar forest area. "In terms of wildlife management and protection, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and Tamil Nadu are far ahead of us. Our two tiger reserves (Kawal and Amrabad) are no match to Bandipur or Kanha reserves in other states," the official said in his report.
Worse still, a majority of the officers posted in critical wildlife areas are not properly trained, the report said. 
In forest divisions like Jannaram (Kawal core), Khanapur (Kawal core), Utnoor (Kawal core), Nirmal (Kawal buffer), Asifabad (Kawal core and buffer), Adilabad (corridor) and Bellampally (corridor) which form part of Kawal Tiger Reserve, many posts are lying vacant. Telangana principal chief conservator RM Dobriyal said: "Some 35 FDO vacancies have to be filled. We have written to TSPSC for recuritment of officers. However, there are no proposals to separate territorial and wildlife wings again. The de-merger was done in 2014," he said.