BHOPAL: The National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) has taken cognisance of a complaint filed by wildlife enthusiast Capt Brajesh Bharadwaj concerning the capture of a suspected 'man-eating' tiger. 
The federal agency has asked Madhya Pradesh forest to look into the matter.
Bharadwaj's letter addressed to the member secretary of the NTCA raised concerns about the recent incidents near the Rampuri, Jhamrapani, and Sawrireeth villages in Kurai Tehsil in Seoni district in MP, situated close to the Pench Tiger Reserve (in Seoni MP).
Over the past few weeks, six human fatalities have been reported, with two occurring in Rampuri (Chikhlapani). 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreNotably, a woman lost her life due to a tiger attack in the nearby village of Sawrireeth within three hours of the suspected man-eater tiger being darted.
Expressing concern over the delayed arrival of the elephant rescue squad assigned to capture the alleged man-eating tiger, Bharadwaj highlighted the resulting loss of numerous human lives.
The complaint urged the NTCA to conduct a thorough examination of the sequence of events leading from the initial human casualty to the identification that led to the mistaken darting of the suspected man-eater tiger on November 8, 2023. 
Bharadwaj emphasized that another human fatality occurred within three hours of darting the tiger, casting doubt on the tiger's identification as the perpetrator.
The letter also underscored the necessity for investigating the accurate identification of two tigers purportedly responsible for simultaneous human killings in the same area, as claimed by the forest department. 
The darted tiger, alleged to be 12 years old with a partially damaged canine, is disputed by villagers who believe it to be a cattle-lifting tiger, not the human attacker.
Amid ongoing human casualties, injuries, and a prevailing law-and-order crisis, the villagers had even threatened to boycott the MP election.