Gurgaon: Otherwise a wetland, much of the Sultanpur National Park is dry. Large patches, which would usually be submerged in four feet of water, are now barren, with nilgais resting and grazing on the bed of the lake.
Drying up the water bodies, officials told TOI, was essential. In Jan this year, the wildlife department shut off water supply from the Gurgaon canal to Sultanpur, a designated Ramsar site.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoIt was because they had spotted catfish last year. 

Catfish, officials explained, is an invasive species that consumes smaller fish rapidly. The smaller fish are also food for resident birds in Sultanpur.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo“We are ensuring that no catfish enters the park. Catfish eat up smaller fishes, which are food for birds, damaging ecological balance of the area,” wildlife inspector Rajesh Chahal said on Monday. 
Additionally, drying up large parts of the 350-acre wetland, which runs along the Gurgaon-Jhajjar highway, allows the wildlife department to remove weeds and the top layer of soil, which can inhibit growth of plants and trees that in turn are nesting spaces for birds. 
Of the resident and migratory birds that make the wetland their home, at least ten species are critically endangered. In winter, the wetland also hosts thousands of migratory birds, with numbers usually reaching 30,000. The guests include waders (water-dependent birds), ducks (require slightly deeper water), and warblers (who prefer reeds).
The timing of such an intervention is critical as the park needs to have enough water by June-July, when the resident birds start breeding and need to nest within the area. 
“If the fresh fish, which will be put in the lake after the removal of catfish from the wetland, enters the wetland late, then it might cause a deficit of food for resident birds who will be breeding by then,” said Pankaj Gupta, member of the Delhi Bird Society.
But there’s also a concern.
Though the monthly supply of 10-15 cusecs of water was stopped, officials didn’t expect large parts of the wetland to dry up completely and rapidly. They suspect the lack of non-monsoon rainfall might be to blame this year.
Still, they believe they are in control and have a contingency plan.
“Yes, it is correct that some large parts of the wetland have dried up very fast, which was not the case in earlier years. We are yet to determine the reason, but we suspect it is because of the lack of rain this year. We are planning to start using an old tube well to draw water in case the core area of the wetland starts to dry up in the summer. Also, we will request the irrigation department to provide water for a few days if needed,” the wildlife inspector added.