Bengaluru: The state government’s proposal to set a two-month deadline for the citizens to disclose their illegally kept wildlife articles is caught in a legal hurdle. 
The Supreme Court’s refusal to extend the deadline for surrendering or disclosure of wildlife articles in a similar case from Kerala in 2011 has cast a shadow over Karnataka’s plan. The forest department has sought advice from the advocate general and the law department before placing the subject before the cabinet for a final decision.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
 Close on the heels of a controversy surrounding the wearing of tiger claws and subsequent raids by the forest department, chief minister Siddaramaiah had directed the forest minister to explore the possibilities of extending the deadline. Subsequently, forest minister Eshwar Khandre had also formed a committee and sought a report in a week. Later, the minister said the government was considering extending the two-month deadline and the matter would be taken up for discussion in the cabinet on November 9.
“The Apex court’s decision in the Vishalakshi Amma vs the State of Kerala and others is very clear. The court upheld the Kerala high court’s division bench order and ruled that if a person owning or holding wildlife stock has failed to make any application within a set deadline to declare, then the ownership shall remain with the state government or the forest department. It refused to interfere in the decision taken by the chief wildlife warden rejecting the disclosure application,” said a senior official from the forest department. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More The official said the department is exploring possibilities to provide one-time relaxation. “Once the decision is made and if anyone challenges it in the court, it will result in a setback. Hence, we wanted to explore a legal option where citizens can either surrender or disclose the possession of articles,” sources close to the forest minister said. 
The proposal was not taken up for discussion during the cabinet meeting. 
Khandre said: “We have already discussed the proposal at the department level. We are now awaiting legal opinion and will decide on it during the winter session in Belagavi.” 
Former PCCF and chief wildlife warden of Karnataka Braj Kishore Singh said it is not possible to give another extension. “The move will only support the manufacturing of such articles with a claim that they were produced before the relaxation period. All wildlife articles will be the property of the state or the forest department and it shall be seized and destroyed.”