“It has been said, ‘See Naples and die’; I would alter it to ‘See the Strobilanthes flower and die,” wrote the late Jamal Ara, possibly India’s first ‘birdwoman’. Her little-known legacy finds both space and a face in the book ‘Women in the Wild: Stories of India’s Most Brilliant Women Wildlife Biologists’. Edited by Anita Mani, a keen birder who runs the imprint Indian Pitta, it features essays on glass-ceiling breakers in conservation.Mani talks to Sunday Times about the challenges they faced and surmounted.
The cover of ‘Women In The Wild’ has a striking black-and-white image of a woman in uniform, smiling into the camera. Who is she?

That’s J Vijaya, the Turtle Girl, whose story features in the book’s second essay. The photo was taken at the Nadukani forest in Kerala where Viji was studying the Cochin Forest Cane Turtle, a species thought lost to science until she re-discovered it. It is now named after her — Vijayachelys sylvatica. It was Viji’s photo that made me read up every scrap of material that I could find about her. The more I learnt, the more fascinated I grew. I also grew up in Chennai, and I know how she must have stood out in the city’s conservative social milieu as a young woman travelling independently and studying wildlife. I’d also been reading about the work of other women in the field, and what struck me were the challenges that these biologists were taking on to push ahead with research and conservation projects that had not been attempted before. That’s how the idea for this book took shape. The biologists featured in the book work in a variety of landscapes and habitats — from the high Himalaya to grasslands and coastal regions. Some work in the North-East, others in the central Indian landscape, yet others in Western Ghats. While some work on areas of science that impact large animal landscapes across the country (take Dr Uma Ramakrishnan and her work in tiger genetics), others have focused a quarter century of effort in reviving a specific landscape (like Dr Divya Mudappa who works for the restoration of rainforests in Valparai).
The book opens with an essay on Jamal Ara. How did India’s first women ornithologists stay a hidden figure for so long?

    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteThat’s a good question. I think it has to do partly with the fact that she lived in the pre-digital universe (you had to have been a subscriber to a specialist journal to read her). She also worked in a remote part of India — undivided Bihar; perhaps had she worked in, say, Mumbai, she might have been profiled and written about more. Interestingly, due to her first name, a lot of birdwatchers, many of whom have her book ‘Watching Birds’, also thought she was a man!
“The research and conservation space can be a bit of an old boys’ club,” you write in the introduction. What were the various mountains that India’s pioneering women field biologists had to climb on their way to the top?

It varied for each of them, but the broad themes are around choice of wildlife as a career, finding acceptance in their families, personal mountains stemming from mental illness and depression (for both Ara and Vijaya), balancing work and family life, and the challenges that come from independent travel and work, especially for those women who worked before the 1990s.
Were the men in their habitat supportive of their careers in the wild?

Some of the biologists speak of growing up in families that were naturally bent towards academia and learning, of fathers who were protective but supportive and willing to let go and husbands who embraced the outdoors and wild like they did. So, while the answer is yes, I don’t see an exclusive causal relationship between this and the success they achieved.
Earlier this year, social media was buzzing with tales of harassment that women scientists suffered at the hands of a male director at a noted conservation organisation. What steps need to be taken to make conservation a safer landscape?

The harassment occurred (and many other examples of it) because the system was not doing enough. The wildlife research space (like many other disciplines) needs a framework that protects women at work so that they can work as fearlessly as their male colleagues. Recent initiatives by informal collectives such as Conservationists and Ecologists Against Sexual Harassment (CEASE) are important due to the vacuum that exists with many institutions.
How has the book changed you – both as a weaver of words and a watcher of birds?

I wrote the essays on (biologist) Nandini Velho and (award-winning marine conservationist) Divya Karnad. Interacting with them and looking at ecology, communities and conservation through the lens of their perspective certainly broadened mine. This will colour how I watch and write about birds for sure. In all the essays, what gripped me were the journeys undertaken rather than the outcomes — for me, these certainly dented my city-bred sense of entitlement as well!
In case a biopic were to be made on India's first birdwoman, who would you like to see essaying the role of Jamal Ara?

That’s hard….perhaps Dia Mirza? She seems to have an instinctive love for wild places. I asked Raza Kazmi who wrote the essay on Ara for his opinion and he had some interesting choices. To quote, “I think someone like Radhika Apte or Nimrat Kaur, or even Taapsee Pannu who have played diverse roles could do it. Oh and after I saw Samantha play the role of an LTTE rebel in 'Family Man 2' perhaps even she could do it.” In the introduction you mention women conservationists who could not be featured. Is there a sequel in the making? Not in the works right now, but the response to the book suggests that this is an area worth exploring. Many readers have come back saying the stories were eye-opening and inspirational; a lot of people hadn’t heard of Ara or Vijaya. And this is a gender non-specific response, which is good.