Nagpur: The public works department’s (PWD) national highway division has sought relaxation in construction of number of wildlife underpasses on the 150km long Gadchiroli-Allapalli-Sironcha NH-353C. It also wants condition to be waived regarding approval from the standing committee of National Board for Wildlife (SC-NBWL) for forest land diversion.
Work is already in progress on the linear project which requires diversion of 132.102 hectares of forest land to upgrade the road to four-lane.PWD wants SC-NBWL to waive condition for diversion of 22.567 hectares land which falls in the tiger corridor as per the Eastern Vidarbha Landscape (EVL) report by the WII. Over 27,000 trees will be felled for the project.

The MoEFCC’s regional empowered committee (REC) is yet to agree to both the demands. At the meeting on May 31, 2024, the committee rejected demand for waiving SC-NBWL condition. Regarding reduction in number of wildlife mitigation measures, it said a decision can be taken only after receipt of the joint survey report by the PWD and forest officials.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoThe REC decided that the state’s nodal officer may instruct the road agency and the forest officials concerned to re-examine the number of box culverts required by examining geographical conditions, existing bridges, road safety, Wildlife Institute of India (WII) guidelines before submitting a report.
The REC while granting in-principle approval for Stage-I stated that the PWD in consultation with the forest department shall ensure that there are enough openings available for movement of wildlife all through the alignment.
“A box culvert minimum 4 metres wide and 3 metres long (4X3) shall be constructed at every 400 metres, and wherever required size of box culverts shall be increased up to 10x3 metres in consultation with the deputy conservator concerned, preferably every 1,000-1,200 metres,” the REC stated.
The committee also sought a report in this regard along with the Stage-I compliances. However, the PWD has said that provision of so many underpasses is becoming unfeasible in terms of execution and economics. Instead, the road agency told the committee 120 box culverts/pipe culverts/bridges for the entire stretch may be possible. It has also requested to reduce the box cell provision from every 400 metres to every kilometre in forest sections.
Talking to TOI, senior forest officials said, “The areas where these mitigation steps have been suggested are part of tiger corridors and surrounds Pranhita Wildlife Sanctuary. The PWD is of the view that the suggested mitigation measures have low structural feasibility. However, the agency will have to justify why mitigation steps need reduction.”