Keri: In May last year, a series of forest fires burnt down large patches of the Mhadei Wildlife Sanctuary, causing irreversible damage to the flora and fauna inside the sanctuary. In recent years, encroachment and illegal tree felling, along with last year’s forest fires, have led to significant degradation inside the Mhadei Wildlife Sanctuary. Now, a case of further tree felling in the sanctuary area has come to light.
The tree felling was first noticed by a group of trekkers who were visiting the hill dedicated to folk deity Hulaneshwar inside the sanctuary area. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
“It is painful to see that after the monsoon season, new forest clearances have been noticed and new attempts of tree felling are going on,” one of the trekkers, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said. Besides the trees being felled, the entire patch on Hulaneshwar hill was seen burnt, turning the grasses and flora below the trees on the ground to ashes.
Following the forest fires, state government, during the previous assembly session, had assured to take measures to curtail deforestation in the Mhadei Wildlife Sanctuary.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoDeputy conservator of forests (wildlife) Anand Jadhav, said, “I will look into the matter and take the needful steps at the earliest.”
Even though the area under the Mhadei Wildlife Sanctuary stands legally protected since 1999 through a notification, it has been seen forest clearances continue posing a serious threat to its ecology and wildlife.
 Those in the know said that in order to expand cashew plantations near the sanctuary area, tree felling is carried out in a clandestine manner by using axes to damage the base of the trees to make it appear like a natural tree fall.
Wildlifers working in the Mhadei Wildlife Sanctuary area said that, other than the hill dedicated to Hulaneshwar too, tree felling has increased inside the sanctuary following the forest fires, taking advantage of the deteriorated forest cover.
Deforestation and degradation taking place in the areas of the Mhadei Wildlife sanctuary has already intensified the man-wildlife conflict in the vicinity. The threat posed to the natural habitat has been forcing the bison, wild boars and other wild animals into the horticultural and agricultural fields,” said Amrutsingh, a wildlife enthusiast from Bicholim.
Earlier, in 2019 too when similar activities of tree felling were brought to the notice of the deputy conservator of forests (wildlife), the culprits involved were arrested and the deforestation was stopped. However, tree felling has now resumed.