Mysuru: One day after former gram panchayat member Balaji Nayak was mauled to death by a tiger in Moliyur range of Bandipur Tiger Reserve, principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife) Subhash K Malkhede, who is also Karnataka’s chief wildlife warden, visited the spot on Tuesday. 
He met the family members of Balaji Nayak, who was cremated at his field later in the day. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoNayak was working in his field when a big cat attacked and killed him on Monday afternoon. 
This is the second incident of attack by a tiger in less than a week on the fringe areas of Bandipur. A septuagenarian Veerabhadra Bhovi was attacked in the Hediyala range on October 31. He is still undergoing treatment at KR Hospital and his condition is said to be out of danger. 
Both incidents happened close to forest areas. Balaji was killed within 100 meters outside the forest while Bhovi was attacked some 400 meters from the tiger reserve. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoSubhash told TOI that he reviewed the preparation and operation to nab the tiger and it would commence early on Wednesday. The top forest officer who is camping at the site, said “We’re checking records of the tiger in the region.” According to authorities, two elephants Rohit and Hiranya from Ramapura elephant camp in Bandipur have been roped in for the operation. Traps have been laid along with camera traps to track and rescue the big cat to prevent further threats. 
About 40 camera traps are fixed at two locations while cages including the Tumakuru-type or room-cage, have been placed. 
HD Kote MLA Anil Chikkamadu handed over a compensation cheque of Rs 15 lakh to the next of kin of Balaji Nayak late on Monday. 
Tiger caught in camera trap in Hediyala
A week after the Hediyala incident, an image of a tiger was captured in camera traps at two places. It appears the tiger is aged around 10 years and the operation to rescue it, which is said to have attacked a 70-year-old cattle farmer in October, is on. 
An officer said, “We are not sure whether it is the same tiger that attacked Bhovi. Since the tiger’s movement is common on the fringe areas, we are keeping a watch. Two elephants – Dharma and Partha are being used in the combing operation being done by forest department personnel along with Special Tiger Protection Force members.” 
MLA meets villagers on forest fringes 
Nanjangud MLA Darshan Dhruvanarayana on Tuesday visited villages on the fringes of Bandipur tiger reserve in the taluk and interacted with the residents following reports of tiger sightings after the October 31 incident. The MLA took local forest officials to task for not initiating measures as the big cat was sighted again in the region. Villagers complained they saw a tiger at the same spot three days after the attack near Mahadev Nagar in Hediyala forest range.