Belagavi/Bengaluru: In a move that could go a long way in empowering the village forest committees around protected areas and promoting sustainable and affordable ecotourism in protected forests of Karnataka, the state forest department has ordered Jungle Lodges and Resorts (JLR) to hand over the Hemmadaga Nature Camp in Bhimgad Wildlife Sanctuary in Belagavi to the forest department.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
At a time when the JLR is considering taking over three nature camps in Kali Tiger Reserve, located adjacent to the Bhimgad, the forest department’s order to hand over the camp is seen as a major blow to the JLR.
 Interestingly, the scenic Hemmadaga camp was previously managed by the forest department until 2021 when the department, out of the blue, decided to hand over the camp to the JLR for unknown reasons. Later citing global rules on the management of ecotourism destinations and protected area management plans approved by the central govt, Belagavi-based wildlife conservationist Giridhar Kulkarni appealed to the forest department to reconsider its decision and take over the nature camp. The proposal was taken up for discussion on the sidelines of the Winter Session of the legislature at Belagavi in December 2023 and forest minister Eshwar Khandre had directed the officials to withdraw the property from JLR.
As the camp was managed by the members of the Village Forest Committee, the local citizens earned a livelihood while working at the camp. Between Nov 2018 and Feb 2021, the camp reported a revenue of Rs 7, 21,025. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoHowever, the department abruptly handed over the camp to JLR on March 21 and the sharing of profits was also stopped without any reason. Briefly after the takeover, JLR revised the tariff at the camp making it unaffordable to tourists and school kids, who used to often attend awareness activities at the camp. 
 Citing the same reason, Khanapur MLA Vithal S Halgekar had also written to the forest minister. The letter said that ever since JLR took over the camp, the ecotourism activities in Bhimghad sanctuary suffered setbacks and many youngsters from the region began shifting to Goa and Maharashtra in search of livelihood. “If the camp is handed back to the forest department, it will not only stop the exodus of youngsters but also help in generating employment for the locals,” Halgekar explained.
Subhash Malkhede, principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife) acknowledged the transfer of the camp back to the forest department and said that a detailed tourism plan will be drafted after consulting with the local population.