NEW DELHI: The Gandhisagar Wildlife Sanctuary in Madhya Pradesh is set to receive five to eight cheetahs in the second half of the year, with a focus on breeding and favourable weather conditions. 
A South African delegation recently visited India to assess the preparations at Gandhisagar and the progress of the project in the Kuno National Park. The NTCA shared on X, "Officials from South Africa visited the Gandhisagar Wildlife Sanctuary, Madhya Pradesh, and were apprised of preparations to receive cheetahs under the ambitious Project Cheetah.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoValuable insights were shared while visiting the bomas, control room, and upcoming veterinary facilities."
The South African delegation and Indian officials met in New Delhi to discuss strengthening collaboration in species conservation, particularly Project Cheetah. The cheetahs will be released into a 64 square-km fenced enclosure in Gandhisagar, which is part of a larger 368 square-km protected area with an additional 2,500 sq km surrounding it.
 The long-term goal is to establish a metapopulation of 60-70 cheetahs in the Kuno-Gandhisagar landscape after ensuring ecological restoration, prey availability, and scientific management.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoProject Cheetah, which aims to reintroduce the only large carnivore species that went extinct in independent India, has seen both successes and setbacks. Despite the initial criticism due to the deaths of some cheetahs, the project is now considered to be on the right track, with the birth of 12 cubs this year. Namibian cheetahs Aasha and Jwala gave birth to three cubs each in January, while South African cheetah Gamini gave birth to six cubs in March, bringing the total number of cheetahs in Kuno to 26.
However, seven adult cheetahs have died due to various reasons since last March, including Sasha, Uday, Daksha, Tejas, Suraj, Dhatri, and Shaurya. The first six fatalities occurred within a six-month period between March and August 2023. a six-month period between March and August 2023.