BIJNOR: Over the past seven months, the forest department in Bijnor has trapped 35 leopards, while the region has also witnessed the deaths of five others. However, the department is clueless about the man-eater leopard that is believed to be responsible for the deaths of 15 humans and the injuries of over 50 since February in the district.
On Friday, the department caught a leopard from Jattpura village in the Afzalgarh area, while on Thursday it caught one from Sikandarpur village.The second leopard is suspected to be the one who killed a farmer. Both leopards will be shifted to Kanpur Zoo.
The forest department has been focused on capturing these big cats as a preventative measure against leopard attacks in the district. However, no comprehensive study has been conducted to ascertain whether the trapped leopards are indeed man-eaters.
Bijnor divisional forest officer Arun Kumar Singh admitted that a study to identify the man-eaters is still underway. "Our priority is to cage the leopards to curb leopard attacks here in Bijnor. The trapped big cats were sent to various zoos, including those in Kanpur, Gorakhpur, Lucknow, and Etawah, for observation by experts. The results of the study are pending, but we have initially identified three suspects whose injuries and abnormal behaviour raise suspicions."
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreThe Uttar Pradesh forest division headquarters had already given the orders to eliminate the man-eater in early August. However, forest authorities have thus far been unable to pinpoint the culprits responsible for the attacks, allowing the menace of leopard attacks to persist.
According to the officials, Bijnor district is renowned for its sugarcane cultivation, a vital cash crop that sustains the livelihoods of four lakh farmers. These vast sugarcane fields have inadvertently provided a favourable habitat for these big cats. Although the forest department has not conducted a leopard census in the region's plains, it is estimated that around 150 or more leopards now reside in the sugarcane fields.