PANAJI: The Dr Salim Ali Bird Sanctuary, Chorao, is set to undergo a major transformation with an upgraded nature interpretation centre (NIC) to highlight its mangroves and marine ecosystems. The highlight of this upgrade is the integration of virtual reality (VR) technology, that will enable visitors who cannot physically explore the sanctuary's topography to experience its wonders virtually.
This will make it the first sanctuary in Goa to embrace VR technology to showcase its marine wildlife.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
"The VR experience will be facilitated by two sets of VR tech devices, ensuring an immersive and educational journey through the sanctuary's diverse habitats," said a forest official.
The department is in the process of collecting aerial drone shots of the sanctuary and high-resolution images of its underwater marine life to showcase through VR tech. This will enable senior citizens, persons with disabilities or anyone who cannot access watch towers or undertake nature trails, to have an immersive experience of the habitat.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo"The sanctuary is a dynamic area with marshy lands. We are in talks with the public works department (PWD) to build ramps and make the space accessible to persons with disabilities and senior citizens," he added.
Officials explained that previous efforts by the forest department to set up ramps were thwarted by challenges posed by the changing tides and the local crab population. "Despite earlier attempts involving the ramming of soil and the construction of paths to act as ramps, the intrusion of crabs and subsequent water damage led to the sinking of these platforms," they said.
In addition to the introduction of VR technology, the upgraded NIC will feature informative panels highlighting various aspects of the sanctuary's ecosystem, including migratory bird species, aquatic marine life, and the island village's agrarian system. Visitors can also look forward to exploring gazebos, cantilevers, and canopies strategically positioned within the sanctuary.
"Serious birders usually come early in the morning or in the evening. We want people to come at a different part of a day to enjoy walks through the mangrove vegetation and the thriving ecosystem. We are also introducing educational signage at the upgraded NIC to enrich visitor experiences," the official said.