Panaji: A lantern festival, scheduled this weekend at Morjim beach in the vicinity of a turtle nesting site, has already sparked off some heat. Activists say it could be a fire hazard, and the bright lights could impact the marine wildlife and environment.
The organisers of Glowfest stated that they do love Goa’s environment and have carried out an environmental study before planning it.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoWith Nov to April as Goa’s turtle season, the lanterns will sink and disintegrate in sand before they arrive, they say. “Our show will not in any way disturb the cutest turtles,” the event flier states.
The lanterns will not cause any harm to small fishes either, they claim. “Lanterns as a whole fall into the ocean (5km from the shore where most fish are small) and sink as a whole,” the flier reads.
However, on social media, activists and others have strongly advised against bright lights in the nesting ground of the turtles, a schedule one species. “The nesting season is not over, as organizers claim,” said Aaron Fernandes, a member of a sub committee (herpetology) of Goa state biodiversity board.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo“It has in fact become erratic due to climate change and some nests may not have hatched as yet and more turtles may still arrive. Hatchlings emerging from nests may get disoriented by bright lights, as studies show,” he said.
Nine nests at Morjim, 1km north of the hatchery, and four at Mandrem, 5km away, are likely to be hatched soon. It was a record season this time, as nests crossed 200 at Morjim and nearby.
To unveil “the magical moment”, the organisers will release scores of lanterns into the sky. They have claimed that the shore-to-sea wind direction at night will ensure that they fall away from the coast.
However, an environmentalist working on marine animal rescues said, “Strong winds build up during the pre-monsoon season, and the lanterns could be a fire hazard for wildlife and the community”.
Dismissing organisers’ claims of using biodegradable lanterns, wildlife rescuer Benhail Antao said that the fire-resistant string cannot just melt away. “The lanterns will not fall exactly 5km from the seashore. Wherever they land, their frame with the metallic string may prove to be a trap for fish,” he said.
Others pointed out that the organisers seem to have no idea about marine life beyond sea turtles. “They are completely ignoring dolphins by claiming ‘little fishes’ won’t be impacted by the lanterns. They are unaware about shore birds, crabs, and other beach biodiversity,” an activist said.
Marine wildlife is already showing signs of impact of anthropogenic activities. “Marine wildlife strandings are reported regularly across Goa’s coast, and there is a need for sensitive and holistic management of coastal habitats,” said an activist.
Wildlifers and activists have petitioned the forest department to initiate action against the organisers.
“The department has not issued any approval for the event at Morjim,” an official said. Regarding calls for action, he responded, “We are looking into the matter.”