Jaipur: Roles of forest department and civic body officials have come under scrutiny following a decision by the standing committee of the National Board for Wildlife (NBWL) to not grant wildlife clearance to a controversial luxury hotel project near Nahargarh Wildlife Sanctuary.
Environmentalists have raised serious allegations against the state forest department and civic bodies, accusing them of overlooking critical environmental regulations and allowing construction a mere 95 meters from the boundary of the sanctuary.
A former state wildlife board member, on condition of anonymity, said, “The proposal was tabled in the state wildlife board and was opposed by two board members as permission was being sought retrospectively after the building was constructed. Moreover, in the ESZ, activities are regulated. No boundary walls can be built and there are restrictions on lighting at night. The hotel was blatantly violating all these norms as it organised marriages, played loud music, and blasted fireworks.”
Green activist and lawyer Tapeshwar Singh Bhati questioned the state wildlife board’s abdication of duty to protect wildlife. “It should be investigated what the interests of the forest officers were in going against the law,” he said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeSTICPAYOpen Your STICPAY Account NowSTICPAYSign UpUndoAccording to documents with TOI, the office of the Deputy Conservator of Forest (Wildlife) said Kanha Hotels and Spa Pvt Ltd was 97 meters from the boundary of Nahargarh Sanctuary and fell in the notified ESZ of the sanctuary. “The project has no negative impact on the sanctuary and the area does not fall in any corridor, and hence was recommended for wildlife clearance,” the document said. 
An official source who was present at the Nahargarh ESZ monitoring committee meeting, where the direction to raze the building was given to JDA, said that after the ESZ was declared on March 8, 2019, no new commercial hotels and resorts were to be permitted within one kilometer of the boundary of the protected area up to the extent of ESZ, whichever was less, except for small temporary structures for eco-tourism activities.
Green activist Rajendra Tiwari, who flagged the issue, said stringent action should be taken against officials who allowed construction. Since land use of ESZ cannot be changed and operation of commercial hotels is not allowed, JDA should have cancelled the lease deed. Similarly, instead of supporting the construction, forest department should have stopped the construction and asked the owner to procure NBWL’s permission first.
The ESZ monitoring committee of the sanctuary has directed JDA to raze Kanha Hotels and Spa Private Ltd, managed by Taj Amer, for illegally occupying ESZ land. The civic body is examining the directions and enforcement wing chief Mahendra Sharma says JDA will take action as per law once the official orders are received.