PUNE: The forest department is likely to clear PMRDA's proposal seeking 20.9 hectares of forest land for its ambitious skywalk project between Tiger and Lion points in Lonavla within a week.
Of the land sought, 18.8 hectares would be from Kuravande village, while 2.1 falls in the Tal-Maval.
According to officials, the land that the Pune Metropolitan Region Development Authority (PMRDA) has sought does not house any rare and endangered species of flora and fauna.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoOfficials said the area is hard and rocky, where erosion cannot occur, and it does not fall within the limits of any wildlife sanctuary or animal corridor.
The proposal was approved by a screening committee of the forest department in Nagpur. In lieu of the Centre's approval for the project, the Maharashtra eco-tourism development, which also falls under the forest department, also gave its nod in January. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe Pune forest division has sent recommendations to the screening committee, which will review them before sending the proposal for setting up the 125-metre long and 6-metre wide bridge to the Centre through the state government for final approval. 
"The state government has approved an outlay of Rs 333.5 crore for the project. If all goes well, the execution of the project will begin within a year," Pune division deputy conservator of forests, Mahadev Mohite told TOI. 
The PMRDA will participate in compensatory afforestation in survey numbers 62 and 63 of Kondivare village and survey 253 of Sudhavadi village, as around 200 trees will be felled for the project.
In its recommendations, the Pune forest division has suggested the increase of the width of the approach road to 15 metres to accommodate tourist traffic and an 11-metre overbridge. It also proposed parking, toilet blocks, gazebos, an amphitheatre, and a food park, among other facilities at the two points.
The Lion and Tiger points feature in the forest department's 10-year working plan and witness an annual footfall of 9 lakh while generating a revenue of Rs 40 lakh. Officials claim they also generate employment of 4,000 man-days per year. 
The division is expecting to generate a revenue of Rs 30 crore per year with tourist footfall of 20 lakh people while increasing job opportunities to 30,000 man-days every year once approvals are received.