BENGALURU: In an effort to combat plastic pollution in the protected forest areas of Karnataka, the state government has directed the forest department to take action to ensure that all tiger reserves, national parks, wildlife sanctuaries, and forest areas are free from plastic pollution. During the 15th Board Meeting of the Tiger Conservation Foundations of all the tiger reserves of Karnataka held in Vikasa Soudha, Forest Minister Eshwar Khandre instructed officials to rid all tiger reserves of plastic.
Recalling his personal experiences at Bandipur, Nagarahole, Kumaraparvatha, and other forest areas, Minister Khandre said, "I myself have seen heaps of plastic covers inside the protected areas. All roads leading to these protected areas have heaps of plastic waste such as carry bags, wrappers, and water bottles dumped all along the roads. We need to end this menace immediately; otherwise, this will jeopardize the lives of wildlife. The threat is so significant that rivers flowing through forest areas are also carrying plastic materials, and there is so much plastic accumulated in Kabini backwaters."
Referring to reports by veterinary doctors handling wildlife postmortems, Khandre told officials, "The presence of plastic materials in wildlife-dominated forest areas is always a threat. Recently, 3-4 kg of plastic was recovered from the stomach of a crocodile, and similar cases have been reported in other places. The media has also widely reported these incidents. This is not only concerning but also leads to disaster. Hence, all vehicles entering the forest areas shall be thoroughly checked at two stages for plastic materials." The minister further elaborated that in the first phase, tourists shall be encouraged to voluntarily surrender disposable plastic materials, and in the second stage, the department must penalize visitors coming with carry bags and plastic bottles.
Clear Lantana weed in National Parks
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe Board meeting of Tiger Conservation Foundations also expressed concern over the fast spreading Lantana camara and Senna weed in various national parks of Karnataka. With the Lantana and Senna weed spreading to core areas of the tiger reserve, the minister directed the forest officials to contain the spread of the weed in Nagarahole, Bandipur and BRT Tiger Reserves.
"The primary objective of the tiger conservation foundation is to protect the tiger and its habitat along with its ecological diversity. All officials must work towards it and ensure these weeds, that are threatening the growth of other vegetation and depriving the herbivores of fodder, are contained," Khandre directed. He also directed the foundations to spend funds from the foundation towards the welfare of the tribal population inhabiting the tiger reserves and protected forests. The minister also cleared a proposal to celebrate the silver jubilee celebrations of Bhadra Tiger Reserve which is completing 25-years.