Elvish Yadav has recently dominated the headlines, and not for good reasons. With his appearance on Bigg Boss OTT 2, he gained a significant fan base. Despite being a wildcard entry, he won the prize. Many were impressed by his 'system', and many fell in love with him because of his personality. However, he recently made headlines for the snake venom case.He was nabbed by Noida police, allegedly for distributing snake venom to rave events. He is now out on bail, but it appears that his problems are far from done. Another FIR has been filed against him.
According to reports, an FIR has been filed against him and others in Gurugram under the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972. The complainant, Saurabh Gupta, an animal rights activist, alleged that Elvish Yadav and others were spotted employing snakes in his music videos, which is forbidden. The complaint is a member of People for Animals. Further details about this case have yet to be published. 
Elvish Yadav has recently faced numerous legal challenges. He now has two instances involving the use of snakes against him. He has previously been charged with assaulting YouTuber Maxtern.
Aside from that, Elvish Yadav is trending on social media due to his alleged feud with Manisha Rani. Both of them appeared on Bigg Boss OTT 2 and were praised for their togetherness. However, Manisha Rani has lately unfollowed Elvish Yadav. She then posted a video explaining the cause. She stated that they collaborated on a video, and Elvish Yadav posted a cover picture with him and Akshay Kumar. Despite numerous tries, Elvish Yadav refused to modify the cover photo, so she unfollowed him. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoBigg Boss OTT Winner Elvish Yadav sent to 14 day custody in snake venom case
Elvish Yadav has recently posted a Vlog in which he discusses his fight with Manisha Rani. He said that they were all minor issues. He explained that he is going through a difficult moment and was concerned by a cover photo. Elvish Yadav's admirers have suddenly rallied in his support.