BENGALURU/ MYSURU: Successfully planting five crore saplings over the last year, Karnataka is set for yet another round of afforestation programme to plant five crore saplings during the 2024 monsoon. 
Even as the forest department has kick-started preparations to raise saplings for the afforestation programme, planting of seedlings in protected forests especially in wildlife circles has turned out to be a tricky exercise for the department.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoWith most of the saplings either trampled by elephants or eaten away by herbivores every year, the department has now set its eyes on the dead and decaying trees to plant seedlings. 
Sources in the department told TOI that every year more than 40 lakh seedlings are planted in wildlife-dominated areas to retain the dense forest cover. However, nearly one-third of these seedlings are either trampled by elephants or grazed by the herbivore population. 
"Regardless of the precautions, several well-nurtured seedlings are severely damaged. It is just impossible to retain saplings in elephant-dominated landscapes or forests with a high density of herbivore," said Subhash Malkhede, principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife), Karnataka. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoIn preventing damage to seedlings, the department is now considering either sowing seeds or planting seedlings on dead trees in wildlife areas. "Once a forest is notified as a protected forest especially the wildlife areas such as sanctuaries and national parks, the uprooted and dead trees are not cleared. They remain untouched in the forest and eventually decay. These decaying dead trees will be rich in nutrients along with high concentration of humus. Also, the wild animals do not stamp or climb on these trees, making it a perfect place to nurture and safeguard our seedlings," Malkhede said. 
The forest department is now identifying such locations inside protected areas to sow the seedlings. "Our field staffers have already collected quintals of seeds of native tree species. Further, more emphasis is given to the seeds of ficus species. Due to their aerial roots, these species will flourish fast and are difficult to get uprooted. If the seeds or seedlings are planted on a dead tree, they will easily spread the roots through this soft medium and bind the soil strongly without any external disturbance. If we take care of these saplings for a year, then they will naturally stabilise over the months," the officer said. 
Already, officials have identified such dead tree locations to take up planting post the monsoon. 
10 lakh saplings in Mysuru district alone 
Unlike other areas, the forest department aims to plant close to 10 lakh saplings in Mysuru district alone. 
While officials are aiming to plant 4.27 lakh saplings during monsoon, they also plan to distribute about 3.25 lakh saplings to farmers and various organisations. Collectively, the department aims to take up afforestation activity in 321 hectares of forest land along with green-lining of 51km of major roads across the district. 
Distancing itself from exotic species, the department has chosen to plant native species such as hebbevu, sandalwood, mahogany, tamarind, honge, jamun, neem, jack fruit, kadu badami and other fruit-bearing trees. Senior officials said the department has witnessed a surge in demand from farmers for the distribution of hebbevu and mahogany saplings as it brings considerable profits after six to 10 years. 
As per the department's plan, it has targeted to plant 81,000 saplings in its forest land, 17,000 along the roads and 4,000 saplings during Vanamahotsava to be observed to mark World Environment Day. The department has taken up this green cover project after removing eucalyptus plantations on 320 hectares of forest land. 
The department has already raised 81,000 varieties of fruit and flower-bearing saplings including sandalwood in its five nurseries, according to KN Basavaraj, deputy conservator of forests, Mysuru division.