HYDERABAD: In view of two tiger deaths in Kagaznagar forest division recently, the state wildlife wing wants the state government to declare Kagaznagar (91,724 hectares) and Asifabad (57,564 hectares) as tiger conservation zones. The National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) has promised to fund the conservation zone to offer better protection to the corridor.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo

The proposal has been sent to the principal chief secretary of the environment and forest department.
Kawal Tiger Reserve (KTR) in Telangana has connectivity to the Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve and Kanhargaan Wildlife Sanctuary in Maharashtra towards north and to Indravati Tiger Reserve of Chhattisgarh towards north-east through a corridor which falls in Asifabad & Kagaznagar divisions of Kumuram Bheem Asifabad district. National Tiger Conservation Authority and the ministry of forest and environment has approved the corridor with notified forest blocks in the tiger conservation plan prepared for KTR. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoIn the last two years, KTR corridor has been home to around eight tigers. Also, for the past 10 years it has provided a suitable habitat for tigers moving out of Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve and at any given time six to 10 tigers move in the corridor. It is also a breeding ground and tigresses with cubs are often sighted in the corridor which is the only habitat for tigers in northern Telangana. 
“The issue of protection of tigers in the corridor has become a major concern for the forest department. The present corridor area recognised by NTCA is not a protected area and has no legal binding under the Wild Life (Protection) Act (WLPA), 1972. It is only a management concept to ensure protection of tiger habitat. In order to strengthen conservation efforts, it is proposed to notify the corridor area of Kawal Tiger Reserve spread over 1,218 sq km as a conservation reserve under Section 36A of the Act,” said Telangana chief wildlife warden Mohan Chandra Pragaien.
The conservation reserve, once notified after consultation with local communities, will become a protected area under the Act.