PUNE: The Junnar forest division has noticed a significant rise in the deaths of leopards because of fighting over territory in the last two years.
Forest officials attributed the trend to the rising number of leopards in the division. Also, a section of officials said the "mothers" were deserting cubs earlier (within a year or so) against two years of a normal period.
"As a result, these cubs are not groomed or trained to hunt and carve out their territory. When they try to acquire a new area or territory, adult leopards kill them," a forest official said.
"The deaths of sub-adult leopards (aged between eight months and one-and-a-half years) have been on the rise in the division in the last two years. It is because of the ecological imbalance," Amol Satpute, deputy conservator of forest of Junnar division, told TOI.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndo"We have reported about 18 deaths of sub-adult leopards mainly because of territorial fights. We never faced this issue in the division till two years ago. After assessing the ground situation, we feel that this number will go up in coming years as the number of leopards is increasing in the division," Satpute said.
No foolproof system to tackle leopard deaths in Junnar divn, says forest official
 The forest department does not have a concrete plan to tackle it. "There is no foolproof system or method to tackle this issue. We are trying to find possible solutions by taking wildlife experts' opinions. Our personnel are working on it," said Satpute.
The division has seven forest ranges covering Ambegaon, Junnar, Shirur and Khed tehsils. The maximum number of deaths have been reported in the Manchar forest range.
Smita Rajhans, the Manchar range forest officer, told TOI, "These fights usually take place in the night. We come to know about them once the animals are grievously injured or killed on the next day or a few days later. So, it is difficult to prevent such instances or fights."
Rajhans said, "For instance, out of four cubs, only one or two survive. The remaining die because of starvation, adverse weather conditions or other issues in the forest. Second, the cub tries to stay in the areas where it grew up. Once they become sub-adults, they try to capture the same territory. This results in infighting."
The infighting among leopards is a natural phenomenon. The increasing infighting revealed that the area for habitation was falling short in the division, said the forest officials.
Last year, the death of four leopards due to starvation within four months in Junnar forest division had raised concerns among the forest officials. They had then attributed the casualties to the "ecological imbalance" in the area having the maximum population of the animal in the state.
The deaths were reported from the Manchar and Shirur forest ranges, where concentration of the leopard is high. 
The leopards were in the age group of 1-12 years. The forest officials had said lack of prey base and shrinking habitats were two primary reasons leading to the deaths. Manchar range is spread over 92 villages, having 9,000 hectares of forest land. The neighbouring Shirur forest range, too, has a sizeable population of leopards.