Bengaluru: Noticing that possession of tiger claws and other wildlife articles by several influential people is gradually snowballing into a major controversy, forest minister Eshwar B Khandre on Wednesday formed a high-level committee comprising senior forest officials. It will recommend measures to contain the trade and distribution of wildlife articles, and create awareness among the public about the same.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Acknowledging a statewide crackdown on persons found to have violated various provisions of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, Khandre clarified that none will be spared if proven guilty. 
Khandre ordered Brajesh Kumar Dikshit, principal chief conservator of forests (head of forest forces), to form a committee headed by additional principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife) Kumar Pushkar and recommend measures to curb trade and distribution of such wildlife articles in Karnataka, besides creating awareness among citizens. The committee will consist of chief conservators of forests (CCFs) from Bengaluru, Hassan, Chikkamagaluru and Shivamogga along with deputy conservators of forests (DCFs) from the same districts as members. The minister asked the committee to submit a detailed report within a week. 
According to sources close to the forest minister, the committee will review all complaints received since the enactment of Wildlife (Protection) Act in 1972 and actions taken by the department on such complaints.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo“Be it pelts (skin) of any wildlife, claws, nails, teeth, hair of animals, birds and fish, ivory, horns of deer or bison or any part of the animal body, possession of such articles is a punishable offence under the Wildlife Act. We have previously directed all goldsmiths not to entertain such requests from their customers. If any goldsmith is found to have joined hands with the public and decorated articles in gold or silver, the person will also be punished as per the law. The forest department too is not exempted as any animal parts either discovered in the forest or recovered as part of crimes are required to be burnt under the supervision of higher officials,” explained a senior forest official. 
 Sharath Babu R, a wildlife conservationist, said: “If any person in possession of such wildlife articles has disclosed the same to the forest department and obtained a licence earlier, they can keep the articles in their homes. They shall not display or exhibit the same under any circumstances. Further, the same can be passed on to the children but not out of the family. However, if one owns any wildlife articles without disclosing the same to the government, such individuals will be inviting trouble.”