AIZAWL: Prof. HT Lalremsanga, department of zoology in Mizoram University, research scholar Lalbiakzuala and two other scientists from abroad recently discovered a new snake species from the Rakhine Yoma Elephant Wildlife Sanctuary in Rakhine state of Myanmar and named it 'Herpetoreas davidi' after French reptile taxonomist Patrick David.
Lalremsanga told TOI that the European Journal of Taxonomy, Volume 932, published the discovery of the new species of the snake on Saturday. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
The other scientists credited with the discovery are Vietnamese herpetologist Tan Van Nguyen and German herpetologist Gernot Vogel, Lalremsanga said. 
"The review of the taxonomic status of Herpetoreas xenura species complex, based on morphological and molecular data, revealed a new species from Myanmar, which we describe as Herpetoreas davidi sp. nov. from the Rakhine Yoma Elephant Wildlife Sanctuary in Rakhine State," he said. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo"It is probably a sister species to Herpetoreas pealii and Herpetoreas xenura sensu stricto, and can be separated from the latter species by a combination of morphological and scalation characters, and by its pattern," he added. 
The team has conducted a study on snakes in Mizoram, its neighbouring states in India as well as Myanmar, Bangladesh and other Southeast Asian countries.
Lalremsanga said the newly-found snake is hardly known except the facts that it is non-venomous and the length is between 1 foot and 9 inches and 1 foot and 11 inches. 
"The snake's natural habitat is low-lying areas mainly in swamps which are warm and humid. They feed on frogs," the zoologist said.
"The species epithet is an eponym in honour of Patrick David (MNHN, Paris, France), a French reptile taxonomist, for his contribution to the systematics of snakes of the family Natricidae and to the Asian snake fauna in general. We suggest "Rakhine Keelback" as its English common name," he added.