Bhubaneswar: The state introduced island ecotourism and opened an island café within Hirakud reservoir in Debrigarh wildlife sanctuary on Saturday. 
The island cafe is located close to Bat Island, known for its bat population. This island has been a tourist attraction for the past three years. The island cafe, which will remain open between 6 am and 6 pm, can accommodate around 80 tourists at a time.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe amenities have been created using palm and bamboo trees to lend an eco-friendly ambience, wildlife officials said.
The island is spread over seven sq km of forest patch inside Hirakud lake, which is home to 1,200 Indian fruit bats, popularly known as Indian flying fox. “The island is connected with a narrow strip of land with Debrigarh sanctuary. It has a few temporary fishermen settlements which have been been transformed into an island café. We have employed a few resident fishermen. The fishermen’s livelihood will also get a boost as they will get scope to sell the delicious smoked fish to the visitors. We have set up a wildlife camp also for inter-border protection from the reservoir end,” said Anshu Pragyan Das, divisional forest officer, Hirakud wildlife division.
She said it is only a 30-minute boat ride to the island from Debrigarh nature camp. The authorities have fixed Rs 2,500 for one cruise for up to 10 persons either in the morning for breakfast or evening high tea at the island. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoThe Bat Island was introduced as a tourist spot in Debrigarh in 2022 and made part of the tourism package. The community-based eco-tourism has helped ensure wildlife conservation in a robust way. A fishermen’s community comprising seven families that live on an island inside Hirakud reservoir along the shore of Debrigarh wildlife sanctuary are the custodians of lakhs of fruit bats.
The bat island is about 5km from the Hirakud shore. The Debrigarh authorities discovered the island three years ago although the fishermen have been living there for more than five decades. The island surrounded by tall trees creates a canopy under which the fishermen have small huts. The trees are homes of the bats. During the day, they cling to the branches of the trees and at night they move over Debrigarh sanctuary in search of food.
Visitors can witness a glorious sunset from the island cafe, also spot animals and hear their call. They can also watch birds using binoculars, which the wildlife wing will provide.