Inside the Cotigao Wildlife Sanctuary, more than 100km from Panaji and some 25km from Canacona town, a road veers off from known human existence and into the wilderness.
It is a bumpy ride on a mud road from here, lined with tall forest trees and signboards of the Goa forest department cautioning about leopards and gaurs lurking around. This ride is no forest safari.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoIt is the road to Nadkem, where at least 150 tribals reside.
It is the road the children of Nadkem tread by foot to attend school. The hamlet is separated by just a 3-km forest stretch from Karnataka.
“During the monsoons, when the water levels in the forest streams rise, the children cannot go to school. None of us can go anywhere,” says Anand Gaonkar, 52, who acts as the de facto village head.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoNot even an ambulance can get to Nadkem in case of medical emergencies.
At this Lok Sabha polls, the villagers have only heard of candidates or parties holding meetings, but no candidate has roughed it out yet to reach them.
In the past, candidates like Francisco Sardinha have travelled to Nadkem, but only to seek votes.
“They come once and don’t show their faces once elected,” said Anand.
There are 137 votes at Nadkem in all, including 59 at Keri, a hamlet worse off, with even no power at the four homes, a one-hour walk uphill from Nadkem.
“So many MLAs and MPs have come and gone, but our issues remain. For 20 homes, we have only two toilets, one provided by govt. The nearest hospital is at Chaudi, 25km away. We have no tap water in homes because we were told we would be charged by govt to draw our spring water into the houses,” said another villager, Yeshwant Gaonkar.
Their only jobs are as daily wagers.
MLA Ramesh Tawadkar, a tribal himself, has promised to construct a road and the villagers remain hopeful.
“We had decided to boycott the last zilla panchayat elections. But there are other villages here like Keri and Yeda whose residents decided to vote any way. Later, the mamlatdar and deputy collector urged us to vote too, and the boycott could not achieve its purpose,” said Mahadev Velip.
As a result of the boycott probably, the village balwadi was turned into a polling booth and for the first time this Lok Sabha election, Nadkem residents will not have to trek 5-6km through the jungles to cast their vote.
The village received an electricity connection in 2012 and streetlights were provided only last Diwali.
“For water supply, one common tap has been provided from where the women still have to carry water home every day for the entire family’s requirement. It would make life much easier for us women if the water is supplied to the homes,” said Anand’s wife Amita, who recollects a much more convenient life prior to marriage in her maternal home in Gaondongorim village.
Anand’s son has finally managed to complete his graduation, a big feat in the remote village, after his daily-wager father gathered the funds for a rented premises in Canacona.
Women due for deliveries too have to be shifted to relatives' homes because Nadkem is no place for emergencies.
The village head has now purchased a four-wheeler that acts as the entire hamlet’s emergency service.
“How will we leave this village? This is our home. If we could only be provided a road, we would not ask for anything else,” says Anand.