PANAJI: Goa's only zoo, at the Bondla wildlife sanctuary, is celebrating the successful management and breeding of four golden jackal pups. The pups - one male and three females - were born on March 1, but the news was kept under wraps to avoid curious visitors.
Zoo officials informed TOI that the pups and their parents are in good health within the zoo environment. The parent jackals were kept in captivity in the zoo, and later shifted to a large outdoor enclosure with a wet moat and proper enrichment.
With the latest births, the pack size of golden jackals at the zoo now stands at nine.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoLast year, the same parent jackals gave birth to three pups - two male and one female, born on June 1. "These pups have since grown, and now weigh approximately 12kg each," said a zoo official.
However, the zoo's success with breeding isn't limited to the golden jackals. The past four months have seen three gaurs (Indian bisons) born there. A female calf was born on Dec 24, followed by another female on Jan 6, and a male on Feb 27. "The calves are healthy and are presently being naturally reared by their mothers in Bondla Zoo," the official said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndo In addition, a pair of emus at the zoo has laid six eggs, of which two chicks hatched on Feb 24 and are growing under the watchful eyes of their parents.
Under the direction of the chief wildlife warden, the zoo has implemented specialised care protocols to meet the dietary, nutritional, and habitat requirements essential for facilitating natural breeding.
"The Bondla Zoo team is being trained to stress on enrichment in animals' enclosures, and the enclosures are also being revamped to provide adequate space for captive animals housed therein, with systematic interventions to fulfil all basic needs of the captive animals. Our captive animals have acknowledged our management practices by producing new progenies," said a forest department official.
As the wildlife sanctuary continues its efforts in animal management and conservation, the department is looking at enhancing the wild animal species at the zoo.
"The captive breeding of animals in Bondla Zoo will enable us to improve its present animal collection. These can be exchanged for new animals from other zoos under the guidance of the Central Zoo Authority. The results of the captive breeding of animals are outstanding, and (the zoo has) managed to breed and rear several newborn young ones," the official said.