BHOPAL: Another tiger was found dead in Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve on Tuesday, the fourth this month, sparking alarm about why there is a sudden spurt in territorial fights and straying.
Wildlife experts feel the incursion of a herd of elephants into Bandhavgarh's core area is pushing tigers and leopards, especially the young ones, out of their territories and into a collision course with other tigers or humans.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
The tiger found dead on Tuesday was aged 1.5-2 years, BTR deputy director Prakash Verma told TOI. The carcass was found in Kalwah range in the evening. Infighting is suspected to be the cause of death, he said, adding that the autopsy would be carried out on Wednesday.
Territorial fights led to the earlier three deaths in Bandhavgarh as well - a tigress on Jan 25, a cub on Jan 17 and another Jan 9. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoBandhavgarh now accounts for four of the five tiger deaths in MP this year; it topped the charts last year too with 13 of 41 deaths.
 There has been a significant increase in man-animal conflict and wild animals straying into villages around Bandhavgarh. At least a dozen such incidents have been reported in past fortnight. On Monday, too, a tiger entered a village in Dhamokhar range. 
A forest official told TOI that incursion of elephants has destabilised delicate balance of Bandhavgarh. "Tigers and leopards tend to move out (of protected areas) more frequently if elephants enter their territories," he said. "Straying of tigers and leopards has become frequent primarily because a herd of elephants has arrived in reserve. It is a corridor and there is elephant movement. 
At present, there are 50-55 tuskers in core areas of Tala and Khitoli, and their presence is forcing tigers and leopards to move away. Tiger sightings have decreased for tourists," Bandhavgarh Reserve assistant director Dilip Kumar Marathe said. Herd is likely to remain in core area till June, after which it could move towards Son river. Sources said that jumbo movement from Chhattisgarh into MP's Anuppur, Umaria and Shahdol districts has become more frequent in the past four-five years. Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve straddles these three districts.