New Delhi: The next 10-year action plan for Asola Bhatti Wildlife Sanctuary will have among its top priorities the issue of man-animal conflict mitigation to dwell alongside a healthy leopard population inside the city. 
The current 10-year Management Plan for Asola Bhatti 2015-16 to 2024-25 was prepared by Forest Research Institute (FRI), Dehradun, and will expire after March 2025.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoForest department has got Wildlife Institute of India (WII), Dehradun to draft the next plan. 
According to forest officials, a WII team is already here and has started preliminary surveys of the sanctuary, Delhi’s only such facility. The plan is likely to be submitted in the next six months and it will draw a roadmap for the next 10 years, 2025-26 to 2035-36. “We have certain priorities as some species like leopards are now residents of the sanctuary while earlier they were only migrants,” said chief wildlife warden Suneesh Buxy.
In 2022, a report by Bombay Natural History Society and forest department had confirmed the presence of eight leopards as permanent residents of Asola. In Jan 2023, two newborn cubs were spotted, and biologists called the event the first-ever documented leopard birth in Asola. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoForest department now aims to replicate the success stories of peaceful co-existence recorded at other national parks. “Man-animal conflict mitigation will be in special focus in the coming years. Replication of successful models like Sanjay Gandhi National Park will be in focus to live fearlessly with the leopard population,” said Buxy.
Protection and conservation of wildlife habitat, landscape development for faunal population, water and soil conservation, awareness and publicity through eco-tourism, greening and eco-restoration in the wasteland with indigenous species are among other priorities, officials pointed out.
According to the current plan, based on the surveys done 10 years ago, mining and water requirement remained the major issues. FRI’s action plan had pointed out that the sanctuary spread over 2,500 hectares represented a typical seat of transition from a semi-arid zone to the Indo-Gangetic plains, and has a unique physiographic and biogeographic location. The mining activity in the area has stopped now.
The plan had assessed the faunal diversity consisting of 18 species of mammals, 82 of birds, 25 of butterflies, five of amphibians, and three of fish. The major mammal species included blue bull, black buck, porcupine, langur, common hare, jungle cat, hyena, palm squirrel, civet, mongoose and Indian pangolin.
An official said they had not spotted any pangolin recently, but some new species like spotted deer, leopard, hog deer and Indian boar had made the sanctuary their permanent home.