VISAKHAPATNAM: Animals in Bhairavakona near Adavivaram of Kambalakonda Wildlife Sanctuary and Seethakonda Zoo came out to the roads in areas surrounding the Vizag Zoo after intense heatwave condition dried up the water and food sources in the sanctuary.
The forest department had already implemented measures at Bhairavakona in Kambalakonda sanctuary to protect the animals.This was done a week ago by limiting vehicular traffic after an inspection by a senior official from the capital region.
It is recalled here that a few years ago, three young individuals trespassed into the Kambalakonda sanctuary with assistance from the staff and illegally hunted three deer. Due to the prompt actions of the forest officials, the three men were arrested and a case was filed against them.
According to forest officials, they had noticed the movement of animals on the way to Bhairavakona from the Adavivaram to Sontyam road.
“We have taken measures for the safety of the animals. So, we restricted vehicular movement and allowed devotees to trek to the temple. Moreover, it’s a wildlife sanctuary and we need to take safety measures,” the district forest officer (DFO) Ananth Shankar said.
Shankar mentioned that he had learned about spotted deer showing up on the highway road from the Kambalakonda sanctuary near Zoo Park. People commuting through that route saw deer and sambars in the bushes and trees along the roadside across from Zoo Park, where the border fencing was damaged during the time of cyclone Hudhud.
“Mostly, spotted deer in groups are visible on the roadside after 10 pm and in the afternoon almost every day. I have been watching this for the past 20 days,” a software employee Tandyala Narayana said.
Forest department officials placed barricades on the side of Kambalakonda along the National Highway close to the zoo park. Passers-by can see spotted deer and Sambars even during the daytime.
About six days ago, a Sambar deer was seen roaming near the Zoo Park gate at 5 pm. Forest officials are concerned that this situation may give poachers an opportunity. There were instances of many accidental deaths of deer on the Zoo Park road. A herd of about 30 deer is moving from the main gate to the animal rescue center (ARC) area along the roadside. 
“We have arranged a temporary border with bamboo and casuarina tree branches opposite the main gate of the zoo park to the Yendada junction area,” Siva Prasad, section officer of the forest department, said.