MADURAI: Asir Jawahar Thomas Johnsingh, one of the eminent wildlife field biologists and pioneers of wildlife conservation in the country, died in Bengaluru in the early hours of Friday after a brief illness. 
He was 78 and is survived by his sons Mike and Mervin. 
The family will lay his remains next to his wife Kousalya at Dohnavur near Kalakkadu, at the foothills of the Western Ghats, in Tamil Nadu. 
“It was his desire to be buried next to our mother, who passed away in 2013, at Dhonavur where he grew up at the foothills of Western Ghats,” said his son Mike Johnsingh. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoJohnsingh, or AJT as he was known among his circle, was a legendary wildlife field biologist who worked across the country and contributed greatly to wildlife conservation, starting from dholes to big free-ranging large animals like Asiatic elephant, Asiatic lion, Himalayan ibex, Nilgiri tahr and sloth bear. 
He was also instrumental in the Tamil Nadu government creating a grizzled squirrel sanctuary in Srivilliputhur which was later notified as Srivilliputhur – Megamalai Tiger Reserve. 
Hailing from Maruthakulam near Nanguneri in Tirunelveli, Johnsingh climbed greater heights in wildlife biology by his sheer enthusiasm and dedication to retire as dean of faculty of wildlife sciences at the Wildlife Institute of India (WII) in 2005. 
Johnsingh started his career as a zoology lecturer in Ayya Nadar Janaki Ammal (ANJA) College, Sivakasi, in the early 1970s, said T S Subramaniya Rajah of the Wildlife Association of Rajapalayam. 
“While working in Sivakasi, he used to take field trips to forests in Rajapalayam and Srivilliputhur and wanted to pursue Ph D in wildlife studies. He eventually quit his job and went to study dholes in Mudumalai – Bandipur forests, and the rest is history,” said Rajah. 
During his stint as faculty at WII, Dehradun, Johnsingh motivated many young forest officers and experts towards conservation. 
“I owe all my dedication towards forest conservation to Johnsingh, my guru,” said Sanjayan Kumar, Kerala chief conservator of forest, social forestry division who studied under Johnsingh at WII. 
He recalled his a weeklong trek with Johnsingh in 2013 crisscrossing the Western Ghats in Kerala and Tamil Nadu and various conservation measures to protect forests of Western Ghats. 
Dr N Kalaivanan, an assistant surgeon at Forest Veterinary Dispensary, Madurai, who had specialised in elephants, said Johnsingh’s pioneering work in elephants in the early 1980s was instrumental for the Government of India to formulate Project Elephant. 
“He conducted an international conference bringing elephant experts across the world to Mudhumalai then,” said Kalaivanan. 
“He was a great source of inspiration for hundreds of wildlife conservationists across the country and his lectures and publications are great resource materials,” said N Raveendran, Iragugal Amritha Trust, Madurai. 
Johnsingh was associated with the Bombay Natural History Society, the Corbett Foundation and the Nature Conservation Foundation, Mysuru. He was also a member of the National Wildlife Board and Tiger Conservation Authority. 
Johnsingh received numerous awards both national and international for his work. 
He authored two books -- Field Days and Walking the Western Ghats 
He published more than 70 scientific papers and 80 popular articles in wildlife conservation and contributed to training more than 300 wildlife managers, 50 M Sc wildlife science students and guided 10 PhD scholars.