CHENNAI: In a concerning trend, customs officials at Chennai airport have reported a spike in seizures of exotic wildlife, gold and narcotics in the past year. Among the unusual items confiscated were snakes, rodents and monkeys, in addition to large quantities of gold and foreign currency.
As per officials, gold seizures alone rose from 141.55 kg in 2021-22 to 344 kg in 2022-23, valued at ₹184.7 crore.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoForeign currency seizures also registered a sharp increase, with 82 cases reported in 2023-24 compared to 60 two years ago. Moreover, wildlife seizures have risen significantly, with 18 cases reported in 2023-24, up from just two in 2021-22.

Besides customs, CISF and the directorate of revenue intelligence have also trapped smugglers . The DRI seized 54 kg of gold at the airport last year. “There seems to be a huge demand for smuggled gold,” said a senior customs official. “Usually, when the difference in gold price between India and the Middle East widens, smuggling activities increase. We take that as a cue and step up vigil. But now, we’re seeing smuggling activities continue even when the price difference is not huge,” he said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndo
With more seizures, smugglers have become smarter. The customs team recently requested AAI not to keep flower pots at the arrival terminal. “We’ve had cases of gold being dropped into the flowerpots, which are later picked up by ground staff, who work with them,” he said.

Officials recently caught a ground staffer throwing gold given to him by a transit passenger across the compound wall. The nexus with ground staff helps smugglers identify porous points at the airport. To avoid getting caught by scanners, gold is brought in powder or paste form. “We stop suspicious passengers for an x-ray to find if they have hidden gold in body cavities. We hear smugglers in foreign countries do a trial to see if gold in paste and powder forms is caught by detectors,” said an official. AAI said it will shortly install full-body scanners at Chennai airport.
 But these high-end scanners are likely to be used by CISF for passengers departing from Chennai to check for explosives and security threats. “We need one with a different calibration to frisk passengers arriving,” an official said.
Besides gold, the number of exotic pets, peculiar to Chennai airport, seized has gone up to 18 last year, compared to 13 in 2022-23. Customs officials say flyers from Malaysia and Thailand bring animals, hiding them in soft cases or in dresses and chocolates to avoid suspicion. Barring one Malaysian, the rest of the wildlife carriers were Indians, including women. All 18 were arrested by customs but let off on bail later.
M Kirupa Shankar, regional deputy director of Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB), said when amendments to the Wildlife Protection Act come into force, illegal import of exotic species will come down.