NAGPUR: Maharashtra Pench, the Land of Mowgli, springs yet another surprise. After first-time records of Eurasian otters, and endemic lesser floricans, the tiger reserve has recorded the presence of a leopard cat — the first record of the animal in Central India.
Deputy director of Pench Prabhu Nath Shukla said, “The presence of leopard cat was revealed during the ongoing camera trapping survey near Narahar village.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe site was inside a seasonal stream.”

A total of 15 species of felids (carnivorous mammals) are found in India, constituting more than 40% of global felid diversity. Of the felid species present in India, 10 are small, which is also the highest globally. Though small felids play important ecological and socio-economic roles due to their predation mainly on rodents, not much data is available on them. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo“Leopard cat (Prionailurus bengalensis) is the most widespread species after the jungle cat in India. Due to its adaptive flexibility, it is restricted to North-East India, Northern Himalayan states, West Bengal, Odisha, and pockets of Western Ghats and was absent in Central India. Its presence in Pench is the first record here,” Shukla said.
The grid-bearing leopard cat belonged to compartment number 663 in Narhar beat in the buffer zone of Nagalwadi range which is part of the Mansinghdeo Wildlife Sanctuary. Its adjoining forest of the West Pench range is one of the most pristinely preserved areas in Central Indian Landscape (CIL). The area is just 2km away from the ‘Narhar’ village. 
Shukla said studying the distribution of any animal species is vital to make conservation efforts holistic. “Current findings will pave the way for more works in the distribution of the hitherto relatively under-studied felid and will provide a better opportunity to hypothesize the theories of its distribution in India,” he adds.
Wildlife biologist Aditya Joshi too says there is no earlier record of the species in Central India. “It is quite strange to detect the leopard cat in dry-deciduous forests of Pench, especially since these are one of the most camera-trapped forests of Central India,” said Joshi.
“The leopard cat is also quite arboreal. Based on molecular studies conducted in 2010 and historical records from 1939 by scientist David Pocock, the leopard cat was never recorded from the Central Indian Landscape. One of the limiting factors quoted for leopard cat’s distribution was the high summer temperatures,” said Joshi.
“Habitat suitability models developed to predict leopard cat distributions show areas surrounding Kanha Tiger Reserve as sites where it could be found. Additional targeted surveys are needed to map the distribution of these lesser-known species,” the wildlife biologist added.