Stargazers can now get to witness pristine night skies closer to home. The Pench Tiger Reserve in Maharashtra was recently announced as India’s first Dark Sky Park within the heart of the protected wilderness that prevents light pollution, making this an ideal haven for astronomy enthusiasts and tourists. Read on.
(Image: Joydeep Mondal)
What is a Dark Sky Park?
An area around a park or observatory that restricts artificial light pollution and ensures the protection of nocturnal species.PollDo you believe in the concept of karma?NoYesThese dedicated spaces are also preserved for astronomical research and allow tourists to get a clear glimpse at the galaxy.
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo(Image: Joydeep Mondal)
Stargazing tours to start soon
While the Pench Tiger Reserve has been popular among tourists for its wildlife safaris, the Dark Sky Park and the inauguration of a dedicated night observatory are expected to boost astro tourism. On this, Prabhu Nath Shukla, deputy director of PTR Maharashtra says, “We have scheduled meetings with celestial experts who will visit the Dark Sky Park before the public opening so we can find ways to make the stargazing experience more enjoyable. We are also in the process of curating packages so enthusiasts can stay here and avail the benefits of the stargazing facility.”
(Image: Manoji Rudy)
“Pench Tiger Reserve is one of my favourite forests. Now it has been announced as an International Dark Sky Park which is great news for visitors. We usually explore the jungle during the day but exploring the same forest at night and stargazing is a different experience altogether” — Manoji Rudy, wildlife photographer
(Image: Joydeep Mondal)
Go beyond the usual safari for a holistic experience
Night safaris have been around in Madhya Pradesh for a while but tours and safaris are now going beyond the usual sightseeing for a more holistic experience. Joydeep Mondal, who runs the bespoke tour agency Wildchasers India, says, “When I host my guests for night safaris, I make it a point that they get to experience the jungle at night and not just run after a denizen. We go to the middle of the forest and park the vehicle along a river or a lakefront and imbibe the sights and sounds of the forest and stargaze and spot constellations.”
Steps taken to reduce light pollution and enhance the stargazing experience
The Dark Sky Park certification focuses on lighting policy, dark sky-friendly retrofits, outreach and education, and night sky monitoring. According to Prabhu Nath Shukla, more than 100 street lamps and community lights in Wagholi, Sillari, Pipariya and Khapa villages of the Paoni UC Range are equipped with lights that face the ground to mitigate light pollution.
“With the new initiative being announced, I am hoping that many visitors will be interested in stargazing too and not just about wild animals when going to a jungle” — Joydeep Mondal, founder of Wildchasers India, a boutique wildlife tour agency
Did you know:
The Pench Tiger Reserve is the fifth park in Asia that heralds this opportunity for stargazers.
The Indian Astronomical Observatory (IAO), an astronomy station in Hanle, is India's first dark-sky preserve