Birdwatching is a hobby that many people have made their own and many are willing to explore. This amazing hobby needs the help of a good pair of binoculars to ensure you can get hooked on spotting the right birds from a distance without disturbing them. This will allow you to watch the birds closely and also for long periods because you will not scare them away. Many people love to carry a good pair of binoculars for bird watching and animal spotting during safaris and jungle rides to ensure they can spot those animals and birds from a safe distance and in their natural habitat. So if you have been obsessing over those documentaries on the television screen and want to go out and explore the wild world of animals and birds yourself then you first need to pick the right pair of binoculars.
Tips to pick the right pair of binoculars:
1. Hold and feel your binoculars. See what feels right and which one weighs how much as you need to feel comfortable holding your binoculars for a long period. So if it feels very heavy or bulky for your hands, try to find something sleeker and lighter.
2. Use the focus wheel as this is the most important part of the binocular. Use it and see if you will be comfortable as this is the one moving part of the binocular you will need to constantly adjust and use.
3. Understand the materials the binocular is made of and how sturdy and durable the body is. This will make sure you get your money's worth and can use it outdoors while on excursions and other adventures.
4. Always consider the field of view, a wider field of view will make your viewing experience more dynamic. So never buy a pair that doesn't give you a sufficient field of view to enjoy.
5. The best trick is to pick one of the top binocular brands and then explore the options as renowned brands always ensure they have quality products for their customers.
Our top picks for binoculars:
CASON Professional Telescope Binoculars 
These binoculars from CASON come with everything you will need in a good pair of long-distance binoculars. They come with a central focus wheel for easy use, eyepiece lens covers to ensure you can protect them from dust while travelling, ocular and objective lenses with covers and more. The grip is ergonomically designed to ensure you can hold them with ease. The body is made from high-quality PPS to ensure a strong build and protection for the internal barrels. The binoculars are water-resistant and perfect for outdoor use as well.
Olympus Binocular 
The Olympus binoculars are one of the most popular amongst professional bird watchers, wildlife photographers and even deep space explorers. These binoculars come with a 50-millimetre objective lens in a lightweight body with additional anti-skid coating to ensure a strong grip. The binoculars also come with a central smooth focus dial to easily adjust and large objective lenses with high-quality optic integration to ensure you have a good field of view with very good clarity and zoom. The binoculars are great for gifting to budding photographers and explorers to get them hooked on bird-watching and wildlife spotting.
KREVIA Binocular for Long Distance 
Equipped with a 12x40 zoom along with a lightweight engineered metal body, these binoculars will make the perfect fit for you. They come with a strap and a waterproof bag to ensure you can use and store them perfectly. The ribbed patterns ensure a good grip for bird watching at your leisure and the build is perfect to last you for many years. The lenses are treated to be scratch-free from exposure to weather and other elements making this a very durable choice. The price point is value for money as well making this the perfect choice for beginners and experts.
DISCLAIMER: At TOI, we keep you informed about the newest trends and products. The products listed have been well studied and researched, and are also in line with customer ratings. TOI is part of an affiliate partnership, meaning we may receive a portion of the revenue from your purchases. The product prices mentioned in the article are subject to change, as per retailers' deals