BENGALURU: Driving home the message of human-wildlife coexistence, especially when incidents of human-animal conflicts are on a constant rise across Karnataka, several herds of elephants have entered Bengaluru! Unlike the actual and real herd of elephants, these elephants are made of invasive Lantana weeds that are choking our protected areas! Sensitising the citizens on human-wildlife conflicts, these elephants are making their way into parks, institutions and tech parks across Bengaluru over the next one month.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
 The first such exhibition was inaugurated on Saturday by Rajeev Gowda, vice chairperson of the State Institute for Transformation of Karnataka (SITK) at the Lalbagh Botanical Garden. Over 60 such elephants have been installed around the Glass House and sprawling lawns of the Lalbagh. Buoyed by the concept which achieves both the purpose of providing sustainable livelihood to tribal citizens as well as addressing the infestation of weeds in national parks, Gowda said, " Transforming Lantana into sculptures of elephants, in a manner that yields economic benefits for the tribal communities that successfully coexist with various wildlife is a good idea. Some policy measures also need to be taken in this regard. As part of the Planning Commission, I plan to bring this up with the appropriate departments to facilitate the idea."
 Subhash Malkhede, principal chief conservator of forest (Wildlife) & chief wildlife warden, Karnataka who was present during the event stated that there is a need for additional funds to address the lantana menace in protected areas. "The forest department has been removing lantana to convert the area into grasslands benefitting the herbivore population. But whatever we try to do, the expanse of the area invaded is so vast that the efforts we put in seem meagre. We have asked for funds to aid habitat restoration,” he explained.
 Referring to the concept of coexistence with wildlife, Malkhede said, "We have been coexisting with wildlife without even realising. We are gradually adapting to live with the leopards but we get panicked when we see them on CCTVs or social media. Coexistence is unconditional love for all beings that you cohabit with. As human beings, we have lost that intuition but tribal communities continue to exhibit it. Leopards in an urban landscape may be a problem but we all must make the effort to cohabit.”
 C Madegowda, President, Soliga Abhivruddhi Sanga--a tribal organisation in BR Hills shared that for centuries, tribals have coexisted with wildlife, worshipping the divinity in nature—from a snake to an elephant and the tiger with over 500 deities across Biligiri Ranga Temple (BRT) Tiger Reserve. "There is a deity for almost every kilometre. Such is our reverence for the forest. Despite challenges, including pressures for relocation and threats like Lantana, we're seeing positive shifts and demonstrating that coexistence." He also thanked Shola Trusts for imparting training on lantana elephant making. Shamla Iqbal, Secretary, Horticulture department, AN Yellappa Reddy, former PCCF and chairperson of Bangalore environment trust, Manoj Rajan, APCCF, M Jagadeesh, joint director of horticulture and G Kusuma, deputy director of Lalbagh were present during the inauguration. The exhibition will be on till March 3 and over the next few weeks, the elephant models will be installed in several parts of the city including lakes, colleges, metro stations and prominent tech parks.