Bengaluru: Months after a West Bengal zoo courted controversy by naming a lion pair ‘Sita-Akbar’, and the subsequent ideological clash resulting in the Calcutta high court directing the authorities to reconsider the names, Bandipur Tiger Reserve (BTR) in Karnataka has appealed to its regular safari visitors to refrain from naming individual animals in the wild.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe officials have also appealed to wildlife photographers not to publicize or popularize such names through their works. 
 Amid a nationwide trend of naming animals in the wild, especially tigers, lions or elephants, by safari visitors, naturalists or wildlife photographers, the BTR’s directive to its safari visitors has been hailed by many in conservation circles. The BTR management, in its appeal, has asked safari tourists not to name any animals in the wild as they don’t require branding. Further, the wildlife photographers who often tag their frames with names to popularize them have also been appealed not to do so. 
In its directive, the management said, “As stewards of this remarkable ecosystem, we kindly remind all visitors to respect the natural habitat and its inhabitants. Please refrain from naming individual animals during your safari experience. Let’s cherish the collective beauty of wildlife without singling out any specific creatures.” The officials have put up the message at the safari ticketing area and also widely circulated it on social media platforms. 
 S Prabhakaran, director of BTR, told TOI the decision was taken after a lot of deliberation. “At the outset, the very idea of naming wild animals is illogical and has no relevance. All the 191 tigers we have at BTR are well-documented and they do carry an identity. We don’t want any branding in the wild or for wild animals in the forests... one must witness their beauty in the forest and come back.” 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoAnother forest official at Bandipur said, “If one visitor has named an animal, many others may consider that name inappropriate, leading to unnecessary confrontation. Further, naming any animal in the wild would attract undue attention from various sections of society, leading to chaos. At times, visitors come for safari only to see those animals, and if the animal is not spotted, they get into arguments. Such events exert so much pressure on our field staff while regulating tourism activities.”
‘Unwarranted’ criticism
Yet another forest official said, “A few years ago, we had a tiger named Prince and many visitors came just to see that tiger. When it was injured during a territorial fight with another tiger, many were upset and fuming over the other tiger. Later, a few even started online campaigns with the hashtag #JusticeforPrince. But none of them were aware that these territorial fights are common in the wild and whoever is stronger will survive the wild ecosystem. All this put the entire tiger reserve in the spotlight with unwarranted criticism.”
BK Singh, former principal chief conservator of forests, hailed the BTR decision. “I’ve always been a strong critic of the trend of naming tigers or any other animals in the wild. Even if you name one, how would you distinguish that animal from others? The department may have identified a few animals for documentation depending on territory. But tourists never understand these territories and get emotional with the names. Subsequently, either in the digital world or on some other platform, they get into arguments over the names and lives of these animals. Let these animals be seen as animals without any names. They are just tigers, elephants or leopards..”