NEW DELHI: A recent study by CSIRO and the University of Toronto has revealed that an estimated 11 million metric tons of plastic waste lie on the ocean floor, reported Science X citing a report. 
The report, published in Deep Sea Research Part I: Oceanographic Research Papers, underlines the alarming issue of plastic pollution. 
It is reported that every minute, an equivalent of a garbage truck's load of plastic finds its way into the ocean.With the anticipated doubling of plastic usage by 2040, understanding the movement and impact of plastic in marine environments is crucial for safeguarding ocean ecosystems and wildlife. 
Dr Denise Hardesty of CSIRO highlights the significance of this study, being the first to quantify the amount of plastic waste accumulating on the ocean floor, where it eventually breaks down into smaller particles and integrates into sediment.
"We know that millions of tons of plastic waste enter our oceans every year but what we didn't know is how much of this pollution ends up on our ocean floor," Dr Hardesty told Science X.
"We discovered that the ocean floor has become a resting place, or reservoir, for most plastic pollution, with between 3 to 11 million tons of plastic estimated to be sinking to the ocean floor. While there has been a previous estimate of microplastics on the seafloor, this research looks at larger items, from nets and cups to plastic bags and everything in between," he said.
In a recent study, Alice Zhu, a PhD Candidate at the University of Toronto, revealed that plastic pollution on the ocean floor might be 100 times higher than what floats on the surface. This discovery sheds light on the hidden impact of plastic waste in our oceans.
"The ocean surface is a temporary resting place of plastic so it is expected that if we can stop plastic entering our oceans, the amount would be reduced," Zhu said.
"However, our research found that plastic will continue to end up in the deep ocean, which becomes a permanent resting place or sink for marine plastic pollution."
Scientific data was utilised to create two predictive models for estimating the amount and distribution of plastic on the ocean floor. 
One model was based on data from remote-operated vehicles (ROVs), while the other used data from bottom trawls. 
According to the ROV data, it is estimated that between 3 to 11 million metric tons of plastic pollution can be found on the ocean floor. The research also indicates that a significant portion of this plastic mass, around 46%, is concentrated near continents at depths above 200 meters. 
The remaining 54% of the predicted plastic mass is distributed in ocean depths ranging from 200 meters to as deep as 11,000 meters. Despite inland and coastal seas covering a smaller surface area compared to oceans, they are projected to contain a similar amount of plastic mass as the rest of the ocean floor.