Nagpur: Stung by the criticism after a tigress was cornered by over 150 tourists in the core area of Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve (TATR), the park management has introduced some strong preventive measures to stop overcrowding. These rules will come into force with immediate effect.
On May 17, 2024, the park’s dominating tigress Roma (T-114) was cornered by tourist vehicles on Khatoda-Tadoba Road causing uproar.The National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) also termed it as an example of ‘eco-terrorism’ and not ‘eco-tourism’.

Talking to TOI, Anand Reddy, deputy director (core), TATR, said, “To control overcrowding, the route from Jamni Chowk to Jamni Lake overflow point has been again converted into a one-way. For the last two years, the 2km route was two-way. This means that vehicles can only travel in one direction on this stretch, reducing the chances of traffic congestion and overcrowding.”
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoReddy said, “Additionally, no U-turns can be taken on the safari road. This rule has been implemented to ensure a smooth flow of traffic and prevent any unnecessary stoppage or crowding of vehicles. Vehicles are also not allowed to drive reverse on safari routes. This measure has been put in place to avoid any accidents or disturbance to wildlife.”
All the RFOs in the Kolsa, Tadoba, Kolara, and Mohurli ranges have been informed about the new norms, Reddy added.
The reserve attracts thousands of tourists every year who come to catch a glimpse of magnificent tigers in their natural habitat.
One of the stakeholders Nikhil Abhyankar said, “The one-way should start from Jamni Chowk to Khatoda and not from Khatoda to Jamni Chowk because Jamni Lake is the only nearest water body for tourists entering from Kolara gate.”
These new regulations have been welcomed by wildlife enthusiasts and conservationists who have been advocating for stricter measures to protect the tigers and their habitat. The TATR authorities have also increased patrolling to monitor the movement of tourists and ensure that the rules are being followed.
“These measures are a step in the right direction towards promoting responsible tourism and protecting the wildlife in the reserve. The incident of the tigress being cornered by tourist vehicles had raised serious concerns about the safety of the animals and calls for better management,” said a section of tourists.
“The TATR authorities need to launch an awareness campaign to educate tourists about the importance of maintaining a safe distance from the animals and not disturbing them and their natural habitat. Besides, a limited number of vehicles should be allowed to prevent overcrowding,” they said.