Nagpur: The executive committee of the Tiger Conservation Foundations (TCFs), headed by forest minister Sudhir Mungantiwar, recently, approved the ₹36.79 crore annual budget proposed by the six tiger reserves in Maharashtra.
The Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Act, 2006, mandated the creation of TCFs. This was done with the intent of providing additional institutional support to strengthen the management of tiger reserves for addressing existing and emerging challenges to conservation given the rapid changes taking place in the demographic, sociopolitical, and economic landscape.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo

The highest budget of Rs 16 crore has been proposed by Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve (TATR), followed by Pench-Bor (Rs 7.70 crore), Melghat (Rs 7.03 crore), Sahyadri (Rs 4.50 crore) and Navegaon-Nagzira (Rs 1.56 crore).
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoEven as the tiger reserves are at the receiving end with erratic funds flowing from the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) and the state government, figures show that the tiger reserves did not spend the entire approved foundation budget.
In 2022-23, the approved budget was Rs 26.14 crore but the tiger reserves could spend Rs 23.87 crore only. Only TATR exceeded the approved budget by spending Rs 12.67 crore against Rs 10.15 crore.
Mungantiwar has directed all the tiger reserves to improve facilities for tourists. Even now, most of the tiger reserves don’t have proper drinking water and toilet facilities. “If a tiger reserve is taking some good steps, others need to replicate them,” the minister added.
Mungantiwar also gave instructions to create selfie points, waiting halls, and souvenir shops, and generate a market for locally produced products. Officials were also told to promote skill development facilities for local youth.
Forest officials said most of the foundation money has been proposed for tourism and habitat development. A sizeable amount has also been proposed for research and capacity building of the staff and habitat development in buffer areas.
As per section 38-X of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, objectives outlined for TCFs are to facilitate ecological, economic, social, and cultural development in the tiger reserves and to promote eco-tourism with the involvement of local stakeholder communities and provide support to safeguard the natural environment in the tiger reserves.