JAIPUR: The eco-sensitive zone (ESZ) monitoring committee of the Nahargarh Wildlife Sanctuary has directed the Jaipur Development Authority (JDA) to raze a property of Kanha Hotels and Spa Private Ltd, managed by Taj Amer, for illegally occupying Nahargarh ESZ land.
The decision was taken after the standing committee of the National Board for Wildlife (NBWL) refused to grant wildlife clearance to the hotel project at a meeting held on Feb 22 earlier this year.While the hotel building was constructed a few years ago, it began operations in 2023.

The minutes of the meeting, dated June 24, a copy of which is with TOI, says: "The Chairman discussed the compliance of the decision of the 78th meeting of the Standing Committee of the National Board for Wildlife held on 22.02.2024 with the members of the Monitoring Committee. It was unanimously decided that the compliance of the said decision would be carried out by the Jaipur Development Authority (JDA)..." 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo'Raj govt should raze the hotel and set a precedent' 
The minutes of the meeting, dated June 24, a copy of which is with TOI, says: "The Chairman discussed the compliance of the decision of the 78th meeting of the Standing Committee of the National Board for Wildlife held on 22.02.2024 with the members of the Monitoring Committee. It was unanimously decided that the compliance of the said decision would be carried out by the Jaipur Development Authority (JDA). A decision was made to have the JDA take action to remove/demolish the new construction (hotel) built by Kanha Hotels and Spa Pvt Ltd in the ESZ. A copy of the decision will be sent to JDA, Jaipur for compliance by the NBWL."
The state forest department had earlier forwarded the proposal to construct the project of Kanha Hotels and Spa Pvt Ltd over an area of 0.0845 hectares at khasra nos. 54, 55, and 56 of Chimanpura village, Amer tehsil. 
The luxury hotel was leased to Taj Group, and is located 95 metres from the boundary of Nahargarh Wildlife Sanctuary.
TOI attempted to contact Jaipur DM, head of the Nahargarh ESZ monitoring committee. However, he was not available for comment.
Deputy conservator of forest Jagish Gupta said, "After the standing committee decided not to grant clearance to the project, the ESZ committee decided to ask JDA to raze the building."
Speaking to TOI, area director (operations), Indian Hotels Company Ltd (IHCL), Rajasthan, a Tata Group company, said, "We have not received any notification regarding the decision yet. Taj Amer has obtained all necessary approvals from relevant govt authorities."
Green activist Rajendra Tiwari, who flagged the issue, said that as per the ESZ notification, no new commercial hotels and resorts can be permitted within one kilometre of the boundary of the protected area up to the extent of ESZ, whichever is less, except for small temporary structures for eco-tourism activities.
"The state government should raze the hotel and set a precedent. The owner constructed the hotel within the ESZ, first without obtaining wildlife clearance from the NBWL, and then tabled a proposal for its regularisation and approval," he said.