LUCKNOW: Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on Thursday mooted helicopter services and a four-lane road connectivity to eco-tourism sites like Dudhwa National Park, Katarniaghat Wildlife Sanctuary and Chuka lake of Pilibhit Tiger Reserve. 
Chairing the 16th meeting of the Uttar Pradesh State Wildlife Board, Yogi directed officials to work on fostering a tourism-friendly environment by training and employing local individuals as guides at these key tourist locations.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Also, efforts should be made to set up quality accommodation arrangements for tourists.
Cruelty on animals unacceptable: Yogi
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreConservation of animals and birds is an integral part of our culture. Every year a large number of Siberian birds arrive in the state at a specific time. Ensuring their safety is a common responsibility of all of us. Any form of cruelty or inhumanity towards these birds or other animals is unacceptable. Strict actions will be taken against individuals involved in any such incidents,” Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath said .
He said that efforts being made to develop and conserve the Ganga’s clean and continuous flow have resulted in an unprecedented increase in the number of dolphins. Similar initiatives should be undertaken to safeguard and enhance the well-being of dolphins and other species in rivers such as Ghagra, Chambal, Saryu, Gerua and others.
Local villagers should be educated and encouraged to become ‘dolphin friends,’ and cooperation from the Government of India can be sought in this endeavor. The chief minister also issued directions for continuous dredging of rivers. He said that it will reduce deforestation in villages and protect forests and wildlife.
“Creating a new cadre for veterinarians dedicated to the medical care of wild animals is crucial. Recognizing the critical role these professionals play, the creation of a cadre will ensure timely pro motions and additional benefits,” he added.
He also directed officials to look into the complaints of mobile phone network connectivity issues in tourist hotspots in areas bordering Nepal. He also favoured archaeological excavations on Sonari forest land in village Dharamouli to explore historical secrets in Sohgibarwa Wildlife Division in Maharajganj.
“Take the necessary action after obtaining wildlife clearance,” he directed officials.