NEW DELHI: A 16-year-old boy lost his life after being attacked by a large crocodile off the waters of Saibai Island in the Torres Strait, Fox News reported quoting Australian authorities. The incident took place on Thursday morning on the relatively-remote island, which has a population of around 500 people and is situated approximately 560 miles north of Cairns, Queensland.
The Brisbane Times reported that the victim was swimming with a 13-year-old boy when the tragedy occurred.PollDo you think Joe Biden will drop out of the US presidential race?YesNoThe two teenagers had been using a dinghy, but when its engine malfunctioned, they decided to brave the waters and swim to shore, despite being about a third of a mile away from land.
Queensland police's far north district senior sergeant Greg Giles informed journalists that the 16-year-old disappeared after the boys entered waist-deep water. "Unfortunately the older boy's body was located in the mangroves," Giles explained. "We are working with the coroner to identify that person."
According to Giles, the 13-year-old boy did not see a crocodile before the 16-year-old went missing. "He's pretty shaken up as you could imagine," Giles said, as reported by the Brisbane Times. "He was very close to the other boy when he went missing so no doubt it would have affected him."
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoA Queensland police wildlife officer, Simon Booth, confirmed that the victim's injuries were consistent with a crocodile attack, likely caused by a reptile nearly four yards long. "Injuries sustained are consistent with a large crocodile in the vicinity of 3.5 metres in size, possibly slightly larger," Booth stated.
The local community has requested that the crocodile responsible for the attack be removed from the wild. A Department of Environment, Science and Innovation statement obtained by the Brisbane Times read, "Wildlife officers will survey the waters off Saibai Island by helicopter this afternoon in an attempt to locate the crocodile involved." The department also extended its condolences to the family and friends of the deceased teenager.
(With inputs from agencies)