After a tigress in the Tadoba Andhari Tiger Reserve (TATR) was obstructed by over 150 tourists, drivers, and guides, the park management introduced strict preventive measures to curb overcrowding in the protected forest. 
What happened?
On May 17, tigress Roma (T-114) was cornered by multiple tourist vehicles within the park. After a photo from the incident went viral on social media, many netizens expressed their outrage over the obstruction of the tigress.
Forest officials impose rules to control overcrowding
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoReacting to the incident, Anand Reddy, deputy director (core) at TATR said that the road from Jamni Chowk to Jamni Lake overflow point, which was a two-way stretch for the last two years, has been converted to one-way.PollDo you believe in the concept of karma?NoYesAdditionally, no U-turns or reverse driving will be allowed on the 2 km stretch to avoid crowding of tourist vehicles. 
‘An act of eco-terrorism, not eco-tourism’
In an interview with TOI, National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) member Gobind Sagar Bhardwaj condemned the act, calling it ‘eco-terrorism’ and said that nine drivers and guides were slapped with a fine of Rs 3,000 and placed on temporary suspension or failing to keep enough distance between the safari cars and the tigress. Anand Reddy, deputy director of TATR (core), added that a guide operating a TATR vehicle was suspended for a month and that the driver had been fired.
‘Disturbance, and overcrowding is common in many parks’
Indranil Mukherjee, a wildlife enthusiast who often resides in the Kolara Zone of Tadoba, says that incidents of balancing tourists and wildlife are common in parks but rare in Tadoba. “Since Summer is the peak season for sightings of the beautiful beast, many tourists flock to Tadoba for this. Sometimes, tourists get disappointed if they don’t see a tiger during their safari which can add pressure on the guides to get them a glimpse. Tourists should also understand that they should enjoy the entire experience of a safari,” he adds.