JAIPUR: Officials of the forest department manning Ranthambore National Park (RNP) are having sleepless nights as a male tiger has ventured out close to a village. After the tiger's movement was recorded in the fields near Jubar village under Ravanjana Dungar police station area, monitoring teams are working around the clock to prevent any human-animal conflict.
"The tiger has not been identified yet, but based on the territory, it is suspected to be a male sub-adult big cat living in the area.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoOur teams are constantly monitoring its movement. Information has been sent to nearby villagers, including the sarpanches and the police station. We have requested people not to panic," said DFO Mohit Gupta.
The forest department officials have decided to wait till Sunday morning for the tiger to return to the forest or else seek permission to tranquilise it wherever it is traced. "We do not want to cause stress or trauma to the animal, which is why our teams are waiting for it to return to the forest on its own. Tranquilisation is the last resort," said Gupta.
Instances of big cats straying out of RNP have been sparking concern as the park's population exceeds its carrying capacity. Currently, there are 54 adult tigers in the park-25 males and 29 females. Besides, there are ten sub-adult big cats (less than two years old, separated from the mothers) and 12 cubs, making the total population of RNP approximately 76.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo\
 Research conducted by Wildlife Institute of India (WII) indicates that the carrying capacity of RNP and Sawai Man Singh Sanctuary is not more than 43 adult tigers, said a senior forest department official.
As Ranthambore, the sole source population of big cats in the Ranthambhore-Mukundara-Kuno-Shivpuri Madhav landscape, grapples with space constraints, the forest department is urging for the revitalisation of Kailadevi Wildlife Sanctuary through the relocation of villages, reduction of livestock, and enhancement of prey. These steps would help increase the carrying capacity of the region for tigers, said officials.