Head to wildlife and bird sanctuaries in and around Delhi to spot and click winter’s winged visitors
Migratory birds stay in NCR till mid-March
Around 12,000 to 14,000 migratory birds flew to Sultanpur National Park this year
Migratory birds stay in NCR till mid-March. This season, we observed a 20-30% dip in the number of birds compared to previous years, mainly due to climate change. Winter birds like greylag geese, bar-headed geese, northern pintail, northern shoveler, garganey and tufted pochard, to name a few, can be spotted hereRajesh Chahal, wildlife inspector, Sultanpur National Park
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoSpot a duck wading through waters at Okhla Bird Sanctuary
For birdwatching, winter is the best season as you get to spot a variety of birds. Morning’s the best time as the birds are most active then– Tanya Lall, an avid birdwatcher and avian photographer
‘Develop observation skills to do wildlife photography’
One has to develop observation skills for wildlife photography, say experts. Shivang Mehta, a wildlife photographer, adds, “Photographic documentation can start right from your doorstep and your gardens.Top Picks For YouNCR’s winter must-try: Chilling in local farms with your squadFrom birds and butterflies to critters and small reptiles, develop your observation skills to begin your journey as a photographer.”
He adds, “Patience and wildlife photography are two sides of the same coin. It is important to understand that thought-provoking and moving images take time, and it’s essential to spend time with your subjects and the location to understand the behaviour of the subject. Equipment is just a tool to bring an image to life. There is a process that goes through the mind and soul to inspire you to pick up the camera and photograph the image. It’s critical to develop that process and keep nurturing that skill.”
Be patient and practice well, suggest bird photographers 
Birdwatching guide 
"It was such a heartwarming experience to watch colourful feather friends flying in the foggy NCR sky," says Akash, a birdwatcher
Birding hotspot Okhla Bird Sanctuary soon to be on state’s eco-tourism map, says UP forest and environment minister Krishnapal Malik
Follow these tips while you begin your birdwatching journey