Nagpur: To make sure wildlife gets its due and they are safe, people from over a dozen villages surrounding the Mahendri Conservation Reserve (MCR) in Warud in Amravati forest division, have vociferously demanded sanctuary status to Mahendri.
“The affected farmers and villagers will stage a road blockade (chakka jam) on the Maharashtra-MP border on Friday and will also boycott the forthcoming elections if their demand to declare Mahendri as a sanctuary is not met with.In December, they also plan to stage a chain hunger strike. Over 500 people submitted a memorandum to tehsildar on September 21,” said Kishore Ghatole, deputy sarpanch, Linga.


    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe affected farmers want they be included in the Mahendri sanctuary and relocated by taking away their farmlands that are adjoining Mahendri. The villages include Pandhri, Linga, Karwar, Karli, Jamgaon, Pipalgad, Mahendri, Urad, Lohdara, Jamthi, Ekalvihiri and others.
“We are living under the fear of wild animals like tigers, leopards, and sloth bears. Besides, large-scale crop depredation by wild animals like nilgai, wild boars, and deer have made our lives miserable,” said Sushila Bidkar, a progressive farmer from Pusla, who owns a farm in the midst of a forest area in Pandhri.
“The state forest department has failed to tackle man-animal conflict and expedite compensation,” Bidkar said.
On September 13, 2021, the 68sqkm pristine Mahendri forest was notified as the 15th conservation reserve in Maharashtra, though the chorus for the sanctuary was widespread. 
Amid protest, the SBWL formed a four-member committee to examine the feasibility of declaring Mahendri as a sanctuary. Two NGO members Kishor Rithe and Yadav Tarte Patil recommended declaring the area a sanctuary. However, both CCF and deputy conservator, Amravati, opposed the move owing to financial implications.
As per an estimate, the approximate cost of rehabilitation includes 10 villages that will have to be relocated. The number of eligible families for relocation is around 6,113, and 2,900 hectares of agricultural lands will have to be acquired.
The package would require nearly ₹1,649 crore for the rehabilitation of villages.
The SBWL members opined that management activities should be carried out for the next year before declaring this area as a sanctuary. It is necessary to rehabilitate the villages within the limits of the external boundaries of the sanctuary in case the sanctuary is notified.
“No steps towards conservation management in Mahendri reserve are being taken. There is no protection and conflict is steadily growing over the years. There are no schemes like solar fencing on subsidy, not any eco-tourism activities are being started here,” said Ritesh Nasre from Linga.
 “Considering the scientific importance of Mahendri, there can be no second thought as to why such a vital link between Melghat and Bor tiger reserves, should not be declared a sanctuary,” says BNHS director Kishor Rithe.