Ahmedabad: Gauge conversion work on the Amreli-Khijadiya line passing through the Gir sanctuary has been sanctioned despite the forest department writing to the Railways not to go ahead with it without approval from the National Board for Wildlife (NBWL). The conversion project with electrification work, allocated Rs 178 crore, has left the forest department worried about the risk to lions from trains.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Last Aug, the department had written to the Railways not to go ahead with the project without NBWL’s nod. However, Railways have issued a letter which mentions: “Sanction of the President is hereby communicated for the work of ‘Gauge conversion of Khijadiya-Amreli (16.76km)’ at a total cost of Rs 178.07 crore.” 
The department again plans to write to Railways asking it to seek approvals from the state and the national wildlife boards. 
The metre-to-broad gauge conversion project was brought up at the first meeting of the newly formed State Board for Wildlife (SBWL) in Aug 2022 where railway authorities had assured the forest department of a detailed discussion before approving it. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoSince then, regular meetings have been held between forest and railway authorities, but the project was never mentioned at any of them, forest officials said. 
The number of caution orders (CO) issued to loco pilots warning them about wildlife movement around tracks is indisputable evidence of the swelling lion population in the revenue (non-protected) areas and their frequent straying near railway tracks, they added. 
Movement of lions near tracks more than doubled in 2023 with 322 COs issued compared to 152 in 2022. This means one lion movement near a track was reported every day in 2023. 
A railway official refusing to be named said, “Approvals from SBWL and NBWL were not needed as there was no land acquisition for the project. Clearance from Railways was enough. The approvals would have been necessary if land had to be acquired.” 
A senior forest official pointed out that last Feb a revised guideline was circulated stating that in accordance with Supreme Court order, before “undertaking activities apart from the requisite permission of MOEFCC the project proponent’s hall also obtain a permission of NBWL standing committee.”
Railway officials said that the Railway Board had allotted gauge conversion works of Junagadh-Visavdar, Khijadiya-Visavdar and Visavdar-Talala Jn- Veraval sections to Rail Vikas Nigam Limited (RVNL) in 2017. 
RVNL applied for wildlife clearance for gauge conversion along with electrification for the above sections. The proposals are still pending with the forest department. 
In Sept 2020, SBWL "approved” the proposal at a meeting and agreed to forward the same to NBWL. A forest official said, “There was an error in reporting in the minutes of the SBWL. In 2020 the proposal was kept for discussion but the same was shown as approved by the SBWL.”