PUNE: A Zoological Survey Of India-Pune study found the world-famous Olive Ridley turtle nesting ground at Gahirmatha Marine Wildlife Sanctuary in Odisha has shifted a staggering 14km northwards over the last three decades owing to severe coastal erosion caused by climate change and human activities.
The study, published in leading scientific journal Marine Pollution Bulletin by Elsevier, has analysed shoreline changes from 1990 to 2022 using satellite imagery and the digital shoreline analysis system software.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoIt covered 929 transects across four zones in the nesting habitat. Federal University of Pernambuco-Brazil and Federal University of Paraiba-Brazil were also involved among others in the peer-reviewed study.
Dr Basudev Tripathy, scientist, Zoological Survey Of India (ZSI)-Western Regional Centre, Pune, told TOI that the findings were concerning for the future of the Olive Ridley Arribada (mass nesting that recently started at Gahirmatha). He said, "The marine sanctuary hosts one of the world's largest congregations of these endangered marine reptiles. During the annual Arribada, millions of Olive Ridleys converge on Gahirmatha's sandy beaches to lay eggs. However, rampant erosion has drastically reshaped the coastline, forcing the turtles to shift their nesting ground northwards by 14km, from the mainland to an adjacent island, after which there is no space."
The scientists are of the view that challenges in researching shoreline changes and their impacts on Olive Ridley nesting are primarily because of the sea level effects on the coastline and human activities that "significantly alter coastal regions, adversely affecting the species' breeding habitats and potentially leading to fatalities".
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo Tripathy said, "They are forcibly laying eggs in a limited space, as the number of turtles wanting to lay eggs is far more than the space available. This can lead to overcrowding and substantial egg loss. For instance, if 10,000 turtles lay eggs one night and depart, and then another 1,000 turtles arrive to lay their eggs, the newcomers may be forced to dig up the previously established nests because of the lack of space. Consequently, the eggs in those disturbed nests are likely to be crushed or exposed, rendering them nonviable and causing egg loss," he said.
For the shoreline change analysis, the study focused on the coastal stretch from the Mahanadi River mouth in the south to Dhamra port in the north. This coastline was divided into four zones based on natural landmarks, such as river mouths and sea beaches, as well as anthropogenic features like ports.
"Zone I was from Mahanadi River mouth to Hukitola Bay and Zone II was from Hukitola Bay to Brahmani River mouth. Zone III (identified as the most vulnerable segment) included the erosion-prone Pentha and Satabhaya Sea beaches. Despite mitigation efforts, erosion remains a critical concern in this zone. Historically, Olive Ridley turtle mass nesting occurred here. But severe erosion has caused the nesting site to shift further north. Zone IV, from Maipura River mouth to Dhamra Port, is the current location for the Olive Ridley turtle mass nesting, particularly around Wheeler Island," Tripathy said.
The analysis of the long-term shoreline changes in Gahirmatha Marine Wildlife Sanctuary from 1990 to 2022 revealed that Zone III, from Barunei River mouth to Maipura River mouth, experienced the most significant erosion, with 89.20% of the transects showing erosional trends. The mean shoreline change rate for the entire study period (1990-2022) was 0.0005m/year (0.5mm or half a cm per year ).
In 2020-2021, approximately 90% of transects experienced erosion, coinciding with a roughly 50% decline in mass nesting during 2021, he said. "Similarly, during 2015-2016, erosion affected about 78% of transects, and there was a significant decrease in the number of mass-nesting turtles in 2016 compared to the year before. This decline was possibly linked to habitat loss, specifically the reduction in beach length suitable for nesting." Tripathy said.
The Odisha coast, particularly in the Gahirmatha Marine Wildlife Sanctuary region, has experienced significant erosion because of both natural and human-induced factors, the study revealed. The natural causes include severe floods, frequent cyclonic events and storm surges, as well as heavy monsoonal rainfall, the study stated.
Man-made factors exacerbating erosion include alterations to coastal landforms and subsequent coastal modifications. "While Gahirmatha Marine Wildlife Sanctuary is protected, nearby developmental activities can indirectly impact it. Coastal interventions like installing erosion control structures in nearby beaches/ports divert wave action, intensifying erosion within the sanctuary's beaches and threatening turtle nesting habitats. A holistic approach, considering ripple effects, is crucial," he said.