KOLHAPUR: The Government of Maharashtra has declared a new Conservation Reserve in the forest land of Sangli district namely 'Atpadi Conservation Reserve'. The newly formed Atpadi Conservation Reserve connects the Maini Conservation Area in the west with the Maldhok Bird Sanctuary in the northeast. This will help in the protection of wildlife corridors and preserve the habitat of wolves, deer, foxes, civets and other mammals in the area.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
This newly declared Conservation Reserve hosts three types of forest cover, Semi-evergreen, moist deciduous and dry deciduous. 36 tree species, 116 herb species, 15 shrub species, 14 vine species and 1 parasitic plant are found in this area. The Atpadi Conservation Reserve will help preserve the habitat of wolves, jackal, deer, foxes, civets, rabbits and other mammals in the area. 
Honorary Wildlife Warden for Sangli Ajitkumar Patil said, "The existence of four animals found in the dog family, the wolf, the fox, the hyena, the jackal is mainly seen in this newly formed Atpadi Conservation Reserve. Honorary wildlife warden for Sangli district Late Papa Patil and Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, Western Wildlife Division, Mumbai, Dr. Clement Bain, have taken great efforts for this decision. This conservation reserve will help in the conservation of nature in the grassy hilly areas".
Under the thought and initiative of Dr. Clement Ben, Additional Principal Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) West, Mumbai, a proposal was submitted to the government by Sangli Forest department and after regular follow up by the forest department, nature lovers and political representatives, the Government of Maharashtra in exercise of the powers conferred by section 36-A of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 and of all other powers enabling it in that behalf, has declared this new Atpadi Conservation Reserve.