Panaji: Stressing on the need to promote responsible behaviour towards wildlife, forest minister Vishwajit Rane on Saturday said that the government will consider organising wildlife tours across India for students.
Rane was addressing the gathering at the inaugural function of the 7th edition of Bird Festival at the International Centre of Goa (ICG) at Dona Paula.
“There are a lot of students who are interested not only in birding but also in wildlife in general. We also need to encourage the younger generation to take more and more interest in this activity,” Rane said.
“We can form groups of interested students and through the government take them to different wildlife sanctuaries across the country and within Goa where they can get first-hand experience and also spend two-three days in such places,” he added. He stressed on the need to push for in-depth research to understand bird behaviour. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreChief secretary Puneet Kumar Goel said the efforts of the forest department in organising the bird festival for the last seven years was noteworthy. “With each passing year this festival is only growing, there are many foreign delegates. The forest department has to work towards increasing that number…as the bird-watchers’ numbers grow, I am sure that there will be pressure on the community to preserve this ecosystem,” he said.
Principal chief conservator of forests, Umakant said that the role of birds is immense in the environment and added that if birds are surviving in one’s area, it means “we are living in a healthy condition”.
“Composition of birds is another dimension where one has to be very particular about. Metropolitan areas are filled with pigeon and crows presence which is not the way to maintain the biodiversity in terms of birds. I am really happy that Goa has got 450 species of birds,” he said. He said that the forest department will soon come out with a bird atlas.