BENGALURU: Forgetting to turn off the sound of the shutter on a phone while clicking the perfect picture in the wild can not only be a major irritant but also disruptive. Amplify it 10 times, and conservationists have a problem on their hands.
Allowing more people to see animals up close and personal in the wild, while also ensuring they do not disturb their natural habitat, is a conundrum conservationists face.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoSo much so that on Thursday, Yaduveer Krishnadatta Chamaraja Wadiyar, scion of the erstwhile Mysuru royal family, raised the issue with authorities during a Wildlife Week event organised by the forest department at Karnataka Chitrakala Parishath.
The main hall displayed photographs of animals in the wild — elephants to hyenas, all the way from Kabini to Kenya — that were shot by MN Jayakumar, retired additional principal chief conservator of forests.
Yaduveer asked officials if they could host a photography and safari etiquette training camp “where they can teach the etiquette one must observe while photographing animals in the wild”.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreHe recalled a tradition which members of Mysuru palace observe while venturing into the forest. “We keep absolutely still. With older model cameras, we could not increase the shutter speed. So, we had to be still in our cars. Silence was a must,” he said.
Safari and photography etiquette training is something the forest department can actively take up for citizens and lovers of wildlife, he iterated.
Maintaining secrets
The request comes at a time when conservationists are worried about behavioural changes among the fauna, as feeds are curated, and objects of the photo are pursued in ways that are far from discreet.
Concurring with the need for people to practice this etiquette, Manojkumar, managing director, Jungle Lodges and Resorts Ltd, said that they avoid tagging the location of certain species in the wild, because photographers will rush in. “Busloads of people from Bengaluru will want to take photographs and this would disturb wild animals. We are trained to keep secrets and not reveal where certain species are found,” he said.
He recalled how staffers, as anti-poaching camp watchers, rapid response team members, forest guards, or veterinarians, work without families for hours at length and in silence. Citing a recent example, on maintaining absolute patience and quiet in conflict situations with animals, he said, “We wanted to capture a tiger which had recently killed a boy. Our veterinarian and another staff sat on a tree for almost 12 hours at a stretch, without getting down even for a sip of water.”