Raipur: In a bid to raise awareness about wildlife and forest conservation among tribal and other traditional forest-dwelling communities, the Forest Department, with the assistance of a Madhya Pradesh-based researcher and anti-poaching expert, is conducting a unique survey titled ‘VrikshaJeev Dev Swaroop’ in the Udanti Sitanadi Tiger Reserve (USTR).PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe survey aims to document sacred groves in the area and which plant and wild animal each community worships, underscoring the deep-rooted cultural ties to nature.
"Nature has been revered in our country since ancient times. Trees, wildlife, earth, water, fire, and air are worshipped as gods," stated Udanti Sitanadi Tiger Reserve (USTR) Deputy Director Varun Jain. This survey, currently limited to USTR, may be expanded to other forests in the future. We will complete the survey by August, 2024, he said.
USTR does not just host a variety of rare and endangered wildlife but it is also home to particularly vulnerable tribal groups (PVTGs) and other forest communities with a long history of sustainable conservation practices. Additionally, USTR is a vital part of the Tiger Corridor connecting Maharashtra to Odisha, he said.
Interviews with these communities revealed that the region once teemed with top carnivores (tigers, leopards) and herbivores (wild buffaloes, gaurs, spotted deer, sambars). However, the area, a game reserve during the British era and pre-1970s where hunting was permitted, has seen a decline in these species. The forest, declared a sanctuary in 1974 and a tiger reserve in 2009, has experienced ecological imbalance due to poaching, encroachments, and illegal logging, exacerbated by a 125-kilometer porous boundary with Odisha, he said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoFurther, this ecological disruption may increase human-animal conflicts and cause soil erosion and lower groundwater levels, as USTR is the source of significant rivers such as the Mahanadi, Sondhur, and Sitanadi. Engaging local forest dwellers and leveraging their traditional knowledge and religious beliefs is crucial for wildlife conservation, he said.
The central Indian landscape, including Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh, features temples dedicated to wild animals like tigers (Bagh Devta) and snakes (Nag Devta), reflecting the forest dwellers' commitment to wildlife conservation. The survey has uncovered intriguing practices: Thw Bhunjia tribe’s sub-tribe Nagesh worships snakes, the Netam community worships tortoises, the Lohar Vishwakarma community worships the Indian Roller bird, Gaadhaa-Jagat worships peafowl, Kamar-Paharia worships sloth bears, Bhunjia-Sori worships tigers, Gond-Oti worships monitor lizards, and Meher-Kashyap worships wild buffaloes and boars.
Tree species like Banyan, Kadamba, Saaja, Peepal, Aonla, Kumbhi, Kasai, Bael, Mahua, Van Tulsi, Palash, and Kurwa are also revered. The survey has been conducted in villages such as Jangda, Kurrubhata, Payalikhand, Bamhnijhola, Udanti, Koyba, Jugaad, Amad, Bargaon, Banjaribahara, Nagesh, Karlajhar, Devjharamli, Motipani, and Sahebin Kachaar.
The survey attempts to initiate a behavioral shift among forest dwellers towards wildlife and forest conservation. The next phase involves creating wall paintings with emotional appeals, depicting worshipped animal, trees. 
The organization of Charwaha Sammelan, where shepherds share information on forest and wildlife offenses in exchange for monetary rewards, has already yielded positive results in curbing illegal timber felling and poaching, which otherwise might have gone unreported due to limited foot patrolling staff and Maoist presence.