Nagpur: The residents of Devhari village — located in the heart of Dnyanganga wildlife sanctuary in Buldhana under Akola wildlife division — have voluntarily moved out thus opening up space for wildlife and relocation of trouble tigers here from Chandrapur district.
“Of the 298 families, only 11 are waiting to relocate, mainly because of last-minute hiccups as their houses have been devalued while irrigated land has been shown as non-irrigated,” said Nitin Gavai and Ashok Pawar, two of the villagers who are yet to shift out.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo

Anil Jadhav, another villager, said Devhari is situated 3km inside the sanctuary on Khamgaon-Buldhana Road. It is a difficult place for the villagers to live due to frequent interaction with leopards and sloth bears. Besides, wild animals often damage the standing crops. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoTwo villagers, including a woman, were killed in leopard attacks last year, which proved to be the last straw.
In 2018, the villagers unanimously chose Option-I package of Rs10 lakh per family (residents above 18 years are also one family) and relocated to other villages of their choice. The notification to relocate the village was then issued on September 25, 2019.
Talking to TOI, divisional forest officer (DFO), Akola Wildlife Division Anil Nimje, said, “We have disbursed Rs26.55 crore to the beneficiaries. The village has 360 acres of farm land which will be vacated and transformed into vast meadows and wildlife habitat. It is a win-win situation for both wildlife and people. Of the 298 families, 296 valid beneficiaries have been identified. Two cases are pending for verification.” Overall, the forest department received Rs62.65 crore for relocating the villagers. 
Some cases are pending for reassessment of houses and farmland. The revenue department will resolve the issue, said Nimje. “Those who have been paid the second installment have already razed their houses and vacated the village. The balance amount will be disbursed among other families after completion of the pending process,” he added.
Wildlife conservationist Prafulla Bhamburkar said Devhari’s relocation will change the fortunes of the park and has now queered the pitch for tigers in Dnyanganga. A Tipeshwar Wildlife Sanctuary tiger, nick-named Walker (T1-C1), had logged 3,500km. The tiger had explored Dnyanganga as well and stayed here for nearly a year, indicating the park is a good habitat for tigers, though there are none now.
The Akola Wildlife Division, which monitors Dnyanganga (205 sqkm), Katepurna (73 sqkm), Karanja Sohol (18 sqkm), and Lonar (3.65 sqkm) sanctuaries in Akola and Buldhana districts, presently doesn’t have tigers but has a sizeable population of sloth bears and leopards. 
“It won’t be a surprise if tigers from other areas naturally occupy Dnyanganga after Devhari is completely relocated. The forest department can also think of relocating tigers here from Chandrapur to ease man-animal conflict there. It will not only boost tourism but provide livelihood for locals in this little-known sanctuary,” says Deepak Purdhe of Buldhana, who visits Dnyanganga Wildlife Sanctuary regularly.
Buldhana RFO CM Rathod said relocation of Devhari is an example of how a well -planned and executed relocation programme can benefit people and wildlife. “Villagers have been provided better livelihood and wildlife has got a chance to thrive in the natural habitat,” he said.