Nagpur: The Navegaon-Nagzira Tiger Reserve (NNTR)’s endless wait to get unified control of the buffer zone even after eight years of notification is a classic case of government apathy.
As per the amended Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, unified control of the buffer with tiger reserve is mandatory. “This was done to protect reserves and provide site-specific habitat inputs for a viable population of tigers, co-predators, and prey animals,” said a forest official.

The NNTR buffer zone was notified on September 7, 2016, with an area of over 1,241 sq.km.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNowhich includes 648.68 sq.km. of forest and 592.59 sq.km. of revenue area spread across 186 villages.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo“The notified buffer also includes over 100 sq.km. area of three ranges of Forest Development Corporation of Maharashtra (FDCM), which has commercial logging operations running into crores of rupees. This is the bone of contention because a unified buffer would mean ensuring ecologically compatible land uses and protecting corridors. The FDCM forests are part of corridors,” said another forest official.
Speaking to TOI, state PCCF (wildlife) Maheep Gupta said, “I’m working on it. There were some back queries on the proposal from the state government which have been answered. Lack of unified control is not good because it would indeed mean losing NTCA grants.”
Earlier, a series of reports by TOI got the same answer from former PCCFs. Barring NNTR, buffer zones of all the remaining five tiger reserves - Pench, Melghat, Sahyadri, Bor, and Tadoba – in Maharashtra are already under the unified control of respective field directors.
Notifying buffer zones around tiger reserves is mandatory under the Tiger Conservation Plan following amendments to the Wildlife Protection Act (WPA), 1972 on September 4, 2006.
The National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) guidelines state that a minimum inviolate space of 800-1,000 sq.km. should be maintained to support a viable population of tigers in the landscape. “However, with the ongoing tiger translocation project, it becomes imperative for NNTR to get unified control of the tiger reserve. The state government’s apathy has hit wildlife management in the buffer zone with unchecked grazing and forest produce extraction and neglect of wild animals,” said Sawan Bahekar, founder of Sustaining Environment and Wildlife Assemblage (SEWA).
Bahekar alleged dispersing animals from NNTR are forced to suffer while moving to buffer areas where there is no awareness among locals who still resort to electrocution to protect crops from wildlife. Besides, grazing, fuel wood extraction and forest fires are rampant, leading to forest land degradation.
“Large-scale logging operations in FDCM areas have affected wildlife habitats. In 2016, the NTCA had even warned that funding support under the centrally sponsored scheme (CSS) for tiger reserves would not be possible if buffer zones are not put under the control of tiger reserves,” said Bahekar.
“Even Bor in Wardha district, which is the country’s smallest tiger reserve, has been brought under unified control, but NNTR, which was the first to notify a buffer zone, has still not been given control of the peripheral areas. The inordinate delay is not at all good for the long-term survival of tiger population,” said Nadeem Khan, former honorary wildlife warden, Bhandara.