Dehradun: The (Pauri) Garhwal Lok Sabha constituency has given four chief ministers to Uttarakhand, along with many top bureaucrats and defence officers, including the country's first Chief of Defence Staff (CDS), General Bipin Rawat. However, villagers say a lot needs to be done to align the lives of residents with the mainstream. The constituency comprises Pauri , Chamoli, Rudraprayag, and part of Nainital district.
Residents say that remote villages are not only facing migration due to increasing human-wildlife conflict and poor connectivity in rural areas, which leads to a fluctuating health graph but are also seeing people moving their children to other places for better education.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoEnvironmental concerns like Raini floods and Joshimath sinkage are still etched in memories of villagers who demand sustainable development. “I’ve been fighting a case since 2006 to get road access to my village, which was used by my forefathers. It passes through forests and therefore, we are not allowed to use vehicles. But outsiders from other states are allowed to use them. Why are villagers facing this?” asked Ajay Bhadula, a resident of Jamun village in Nainidanda block of Pauri. 
Anita Kumari, another resident, said, “We have seen pregnant women losing their lives because they were referred from one hospital to another due to poor health facilities in remote areas. The unavailability of adequate roads and landslides add to the miseries. Pauri, Nainital, and Chamoli have seen such deaths last year, wherein patients died en route to higher medical centres.”
Worried about the development model being implemented in the mountains, another resident, Himmat Singh from Joshimath in Chamoli, added, “All we want is sustainable and environmentally friendly development so that we don’t lose our people to man-made disasters that are later labelled as natural disasters by politicians.” 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoResidents of Dumak in Chamoli, one of the farthest polling booths in the state, continue to wait for road construction to start in full throttle. They say they are yet unsure who to vote for. TOI had earlier reported how residents of Dumak had been waiting for road construction to their village for past 17 years and despite assurances, the road construction could not be completed. 
Garhwal seat has 13.7 lakh voters (see graphic). Thirteen contenders are in the fray. 
They are assuring locals of addressing migration, ending human-wildlife conflicts, and improving healthcare, but most of the locals have maintained silence about the candidate they are going to vote for. The constituency has 15.7 lakh general electors and 12,876 service voters. 
Incidentally, service voters here hold strong reservations against post-retirement benefits and the Agniveer scheme. 
A state-level conference was organised by former soldiers of Uttarakhand in March, and a 16-point memorandum was given to the state govt.
 It included demands ranging from the reservation in jobs for ex-servicemen to be increased from the existing 5% to 13-15%. They want a 10% reservation in all urban development body plots/houses, similar to the provisions in Himachal, Goa etc. Expressing disenchantment over the Agniveer scheme, subedar (retd) from Pauri. Pawan Singh (name changed on request), said, “The state lacks clarity about the scheme... Currently, youths are applying for it half-heartedly. It is only the fear of unemployment and gaining at least some work experience that is driving them.”
 Incidentally, as of Dec 2023, the state's five MPs had utilised “only Rs 30.5 crore of the allocated MPLAD fund of Rs 85 crore,” according to the public information officer of the Uttarakhand rural development commissioner, who disclosed this information in an RTI query.