As citizen science initiatives build momentum around the world, this year’s ninth annual ‘City Nature Challenge’ (CNC) is taking place in more than 675 cities across seven continents. With nearly a third of that number (206 cities) from India, the effort has commenced and runs through 11:59 pm on Monday, April 29. The global event calls on current and aspiring citizens, nature and science fans, and people of all ages and educational backgrounds to observe and submit pictures of wild plants, animals, and fungi using free mobile apps like iNaturalist. PollDo you believe in the concept of karma?NoYes
WWF-India is leading this collaborative, citizen-driven effort this year across several Indian states – Assam, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka and New Delhi. Ms. Neha Raghav, Director of Environment Education, WWF-India, says, “CNC is a great opportunity to engage people of all ages in citizen science. It celebrates backyard biodiversity; I hope the fervour with which people participate continues.” The CNC format of friendly competition across cities globally makes this an inclusive, fun event to raise awareness on planet-critical issues like ‘biodiversity loss’ & ‘urban wildlife.’ Indian cities are all set to make their mark on the world stage this year.”
Shonali Chenzira, Senior Manager – Science & Nature Education, WWF-India, is driving efforts in Delhi she states, “While Citizen Science as a phenomenon has taken India by storm, CNC is particularly unique as it eliminates the barrier of having to identify a species to take part. We have kids as young as 8 observing and contributing! This is in its truest essence – a people-powered movement. We have curated resources like a ‘Biodiversity Explorer Kit’ and will facilitate guided walks around Delhi and Gurugram. Please refer to the schedule of walks in Delhi and Gurugram: bit.ly/CNCWalks”
As scientists increasingly rely on community-generated data, it becomes more important than ever for common citizens to document nature observations on community science platforms like iNaturalist. From a study on bees in urban environments to a revision of the global biogeography of plants, 890 studies were published using iNaturalist data just in 2023. This data helps policymakers make informed conservation decisions that enable humans to coexist with the wildlife around them and view themselves as a part of, not apart from, nature.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoNotably, the number of participating cities grew from 450 in 2023 to more than 675 in 2024—one of the biggest jumps in CNC history. This significant uptick is the result of a network of organizers in India who are bringing 206 new projects to the global effort. In 2023 from India, Hyderabad emerged as the top Indian city and 12th globally in CNC 2023.
STATISTICS FROM CNC 2023
STATISTICS FROM CNC 2023Species ObservedObservationsObserversIndia4,87486,2611,327Global57,2271,870,76366,394