CHENNAI: There is no evidence of poaching of tigers in the Nilgiris forest division, forest minister M Madhivendhan said here on Monday.
Talking to reporters after inaugurating the lion and deer safari trips at the Arignar Anna Zoological Park in Vandalur, the minister said 10 tigers including four cubs had died in the division. Normall, in incidents of poaching, the offenders do not leave the carcass or the body parts of the slain animal.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
But, in all the carcasses in the recent incident there was no evidence of removal of body parts, clearly showing that the deaths were not caused by poachers, he said. The forest department had identified injury marks on two tigers and found they were caused due to fighting. The tiger deaths were reported in various locations such as Naduvattam and Seigur Plateau. These areas are not located close to each other.
The death of two tigers due to the consumption of poison-laced carcass was the offence committed by a cattle owner, who was arrested by the department. Soon after the deaths, the department intensified patrolling in the forest areas. The field staff of the department had reported all the deaths. 
The department did not attempt to hide the deaths, he said. "We are eagerly awaiting the submission of the investigation report conducted independently by a three-member committee comprising of the National Tiger Conservation Authority, Wildlife Crime Control Bureau, and a tiger biologist from the Wildlife Institute of India. The report is supposed to be submitted before the end of this week. We want to know which are the areas where the state is lacking in tiger conservation. The department will rectify the loopholes pointed out by the expert team," he said.
After three years, the lion and deer safari visits resumed at the Vandalur zoo on Monday. Visitors are transported into the deer safari area (where sambar deer are housed) and then to the lion safari where one can watch a pair of lions comfortably seated in an air-conditioned vehicle. The fee is 150 per person for adults for safari. Children below 12 years are charged ₹30. The visit takes nearly an hour. Around 28 people can travel by the vehicle. "Two more vehicles will be added for the safari, the minister said.