DEHRADUN: A tiger killed two women in Bhimtal block on December 7 and 9 in Maluvatal and Pinro villages in Bhimtal block, Nainital forest division, the state forest department confirmed on Sunday after it carried out DNA analysis of the animal's hair found on the bodies of the victims. 
The result of the DNA test of the "culprit" behind the third killing on Wednesday (December 20) is awaited.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
On December 10, forest department declared the big cat a man-eater and issued shoot-to-kill orders. However, taking suo motu cognisance of the matter, the HC intervened and stayed the order. The court said such orders cannot be justified unless the foresters can identify if the animal behind the killings was leopard or a tiger. Samir Sinha, chief wildlife warden of Uttarakhand forest department, said, “The first two incidents involved a tiger, but we are still awaiting the full report. A team from the Wildlife Institute of India is currently in Bhimtal, gathering more information. 
The DNA analysis report for the third woman is pending.” To prevent further incidents, the forest department has intensified efforts in the Bhimtal area. “We recently acquired 50 additional camera traps from the World Wildlife Fund and installed them in the vicinoty. Drones have been deployed to survey the Nainital forest division to prevent any more mishaps,” Sinha added. Coincidentally, the latest report from NTCA and WII regarding tiger status indicated that the Nainital forest division has just one tiger, according to senior forest authorities in Uttarakhand. Initially, villagers suggested that the first victim, Indira Devi, was attacked by a leopard. In just thirteen days, three women fell victim to big cat attacks in Bhimtal, sparking public outrage and protests.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo On December 7, Indira Devi Maluvatal gram sabha under the Bhimtal development block was killed by a tiger. Just two days later, Pushpa Devi in Pinro village was killed in an ambush. On December 20, Nikita Sharma was attacked and killed by an animal in Tada village. Villagers expressed their anger by protesting alongside Nikita’s body on the road for three hours. Fear of prowling big cats has confined villagers to their homes, disrupting the studies of school students who find it difficult to go to school due to safetyconcerns.