Balangir: The Balangir forest division has adopted technology to protect the environment and wild animals. Among these are the use of drones for urgent announcements in remote pockets and a dedicated mobile application, which were introduced recently. 
The mobile application called “Mo Sabuja Balangir” was launched in July. It offers a convenient online solution to order seedlings while also providing a channel for registering suggestions and addressing concerns.
“The application is getting good response from people.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoMore than 100 individuals have downloaded it within a couple of weeks. It also has an online seedling purchase option to buy different varieties of plants. We also facilitate registration of confidential information regarding any forest offence,” said Nitish Kumar, divisional forest officer, Balangir.
The department ensured that the personal details of the informer will be kept confidential. This will help the forest officials gather data and information from various sources and act effectively to check offences, said a senior forest officer.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreAccording to official sources, under 11 forest ranges there are hundreds of identified elephant-prone villages where every year man-animal conflicts are reported. Many times the conflicts lead to loss of valuable human lives, death of innocent animals and damage of crops. In the ongoing effort the department has embraced drone technology to increase awareness about elephants in these villages. 
“Previously we used megaphones, loudspeakers, text messages, meeting and distribution of informative leaflets to inform villagers about the movement of elephants in their region. Now with the addition of drone announcements we are enhancing our outreach and impact,” Kumar said.