AGRA: The National Green Tribunal (NGT) directed the UP government to file an affidavit in three weeks regarding issuance of final notification declaring an area of 337 hectares as part of the Soor Sarovar Bird Sanctuary.
On April 24, 2018, the environment ministry issued a draft notification for information of the public likely to be affected by the declaration of the eco-sensitive zone of the sanctuary.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoAccording to a pre-gazette notification, the area of the sanctuary was about 800 hectares. 
On October 10, 2019, the final gazette notification was issued in which the area of the bird sanctuary was mentioned as 403 hectares. The reduction of 397 hectares from the notified sanctuary's eco-sensitive zone irked local activists. 
 After not getting any response from local and central government authorities, activist Sharad Gupta filed a petition in the Supreme Court against reduction in the eco-sensitive zone. After hearing the plea, the court constituted a Central Empowered Committee (CEC). This panel in its report recommended increasing the area of the Soor Sarovar Bird Sanctuary to 800 hectares, as demanded by the petitioner. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreThe CEC report mentions, "Consider extending the area of the Soor Sarovar Bird Sanctuary by including the Surdas Reserve Forest block of 380.558 ha and 15.514 ha of the government land which currently forms the buffer zone of the sanctuary outside the proposed boundary of the sanctuary after following the procedure under sections 18 to 25 of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972."
In September 2022, the SC accepted the report of the (CEC) recommending extending the area of the sanctuary from about 403 hectares to 800 hectares. The matter was pending with the court for almost three years and on November 23, the case was finally dismissed after the court accepted the CEC recommendations "without any objection". 
Despite SC’s orders, the area of the bird sanctuary in Agra was not extended by 337 hectares. Taking cognizance of a petition filed by Sharad Gupta, the NGT instructed the UP government to file an affidavit in three weeks disclosing the time-bound programme for completing the process leading to issuance of final notification for the purpose of declaring the entire stipulated area to be a part of the bird sanctuary.
Talking to TOI, Gupta said, "The court accepted the CEC report without any objection and the case was dismissed. But the authorities concerned failed to take necessary action even after much delay. We pleaded to the NGT for the expansion of the Soor Sarovar Bird sanctuary as required for the protection of the eco-sensitive zone. The next hearing in the case is on December 1."