CHENNAI: Opposing Kerala's renewed plan to build a new Mullaperiyar dam, Tamil Nadu govt is set to move Union ministry of environment, forest and climate change on Friday to urge it not to take up the proposal of Kerala govt in the expert appraisal committee's meeting scheduled for May 28, sources said. Kerala had sought the terms of reference for an environmental impact assessment (EIA) study for building a new Mullaperiyar dam.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Tamil Nadu govt officials came to know on Wednesday evening the proposal being listed by the ministry's expert appraisal committee (river valley and hydroelectric projects) in its upcoming meeting. "The state govt will reach out to the ministry since Kerala's move is against the order of Supreme Court. 
On the construction of the new dam, the court in its order in 2014 categorically stated that both states had to agree," a senior official told TOI.
T he official said, “Besides, the offer made by Kerala cannot be thrust on Tamil Nadu.” Water resources department officials rejected Kerala govt’s written statement to the ministry that SC had granted permission for conducting the environmental impact assessment study. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoIn its clarification note on inter-state issues submitted to the ministry, Kerala govt pointed to the dismissal of a petition filed by Tamil Nadu govt seeking to restrain Kerala from taking up EIA study pursuant to the clearance given by the standing committee of National Board for Wildlife in 2014. 
The interlocutory application was heard by the court in 2016 and it was dismissed as infructuous. “Since the issue has been accepted by the apex body, it is of the view that mutual consent/amicable solution passed in this regard shall not be insisted upon while applying for environmental clearance,” Kerala govt said. When a similar attempt was made in 2015, Tamil Nadu govt took up with the ministry and saw the proposal delisted.
 TN govt filed a contempt petition in 2019 against expert appraisal committee member-secretary, Kerala chief secretary and chief engineer of Irrigation, Design and Research Board when the committee acceded to Kerala’s proposal and recommended terms of reference to collect baseline data to conduct the study. 
The petition was disposed of a month later upon Kerala’s submission that modalities mentioned in the SC order would be followed and the state did not propose to start any construction of a new dam, TN govt sources said.