Nagpur: The Maharashtra Animal and Fisheries Sciences University (MAFSU), Nagpur, has submitted a proposal for Wildlife One Health Centre to the state govt. It will be the extension of the present Wildlife Research and Training Centre (WRTC) at Gorewada.
If accepted by the govt, the ₹30 crore project would be the only institution dedicated to Wildlife One Health in the country, said Dr Shirish Upadhye, director of instruction and dean (veterinary), MAFSU.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo

“The one health concept relates to the connection between human and animal health. At present, most One Health institutes and research centres deal with domestic animals. Our proposed Wildlife One Health Centre will deal with the wild animals and the diseases resulting from the interference of wild animals into human habitat,” said Dr Upadhye.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoHe pointed out that the increased man-animal conflict must have brought many new health complications for wild animals too. “The centre will study both the aspects of human and wildlife health,” Dr Upadhye added.
MAFSU has submitted details about equipment needed, temporary staff for five years, and other requirements. The infrastructure at Gorewada will be used for the centre, and after five years the available staff at WRTC in Gorewada will handle this centre.
MAFSU vice-chancellor Dr Niteen Patil said that the university is working on many important projects. “We are also the first veterinary university to implement the New Education Policy (NEP) and credit-based system for postgraduation level,” he said.
Director of extension Dr Anil Bhikane said that the construction of ICMR-sponsored One Health lab is going in full swing. “After formal bhumipujan by the Prime Minister Narendra Modi last year, the BSL-4 level lab is being constructed here. Underground construction work is going on at a fast pace. Construction will be complete within the given timeline,” he said.