Introducing The Inventory! The Inventory is your one-stop shop for conservation technology tools, organisations, and R&D projects. Start contributing to it now! The Inventory is a dynamic, wiki-style discovery platform for conservation technology. It is the place to explore what technology is available for your work, how others worldwide use it, and what our conservation tech community recommends. Content on The Inventory falls under three main types: Products: Find hardware, software, and data source tools that suit your project's needs and explore technology used globally by community members and experts. Rate, review, view specs, find links to purchase, and more! R&D Projects: Learn about and connect with conservation tech R&D projects developing diverse technologies. Stay up to date on their progress and discover how you can collaborate. Organisations: Browse conservation organisations, academic initiatives, and technology companies in our field to discover projects and products within our community and beyond. This resource will become more robust as users add more contributions. Be a part of building The Inventory by adding your tools, updating existing entries, and leaving reviews! We’re always listening to the needs of our community. It’s been clear for some time that one of the biggest hurdles in conservation tech was difficulty finding systematic, consolidated information on different technologies, products, research, and organisations. We built The Inventory to address this problem by providing a hub for all conservation tech information, where users can discover new tech and collaborators, rate the tools they’ve used, read community reviews, and so much more! Because it’s wiki-inspired, it’ll become a more robust resource as more people contribute to it, empowering conservation technologists to make more informed and effective decisions. The backbone of The Inventory is the review system. By leaving honest, descriptive reviews about the tools you’ve worked with, other users are better able to make decisions about what tech to use and tech manufacturers know how to improve their products. More importantly, the WILDLABS platform provides a forum for users to connect with tech developers, allowing for conversations about product feedback, improvements, functionality, and updates. Keep reading to learn more about The Inventory! Anyone who uses or is interested in conservation tech can make use of The Inventory by: Adding new products, R&D projects, and organisations Leaving reviews and uploading photos of products Seeing where to buy products and how much they’ll cost Linking affiliated organisations with your WILDLABS account Editing content for accuracy Reporting spam Start leaving reviews, uploading photos, editing content, and more! If you’re involved in developing or manufacturing conservation tech, simply add or find your tech on The Inventory and then use our built-in “claim” feature to become a key contact. After approval by one of our admins, you’ll be able to: Receive notifications about new reviews and edits Respond to reviews View and revert changes Pin WILDLABS content like discussions, articles, and events to your product or R&D page Add other key contacts to your tech product or project If you have multiple pages you want to claim on The Inventory, skip the claim button and email jake.burton@wildlabs.net to become a key contact for all of them at once. The Inventory is an extension of WILDLABS. All WILDLABS content you create or have created in the past can be featured on The Inventory, and The Inventory content can be featured on your WILDLABS posts. If you have any WILDLABS discussions, resources, or events that involve an existing product, R&D project, or organisation, please connect them to the Inventory. By connecting WILDLABS content to The Inventory, it will become even easier to find systematic information on conservation tech all in one place! Here are some ways The Inventory integrates with WILDLABS: Feature Inventory content in your WILDLABS posts Tag Inventory content in comments Feature your organisation on your profile Become a key contact for products and R&D projects you are associated with Access The Inventory tab on WILDLABS group pages to view relevant Inventory pages Earn badges for contributing, editing, leaving reviews, becoming a key contact To ensure that only verified members from our community contribute to the platform, users must earn a Sprout badge to add or edit content on The Inventory. This requirement means that the information you find on The Inventory is reliable. Learn how to earn your Sprout badge here. Read the more in-depth user guide to learn about what’s possible on this new platform. This project was made possible with funding from the UK Space Agency, Arm and AWS. Special thanks to the hard work of our collaborators in this project, The Satellite Applications Catapult, ZSL, Fauna & Flora, Octophin Digital and all the incredible Beta testers!