Southeast Asia Counter Wildlife Crime Program Coordinator Panthera’s Counter Wildlife Crime (CWC) program is one of five thematic, cross-regional programs that sit within its Conservation Science (CS) division. This role acts as a ‘force multiplier’ for the global experts, aiming to significantly impact the high number and range of threats to wild cats. Thailand and Malaysia (Remote) Panthera’s Counter Wildlife Crime (CWC) program is one of five thematic, cross-regional programs that sit within its Conservation Science (CS) division. The CWC program provides technical expertise and strategic input to regional teams in Asia, Africa and the Americas working within Panthera’s Conservation Action (CA) division. The Southeast Asia Counter Wildlife Crime (CWC) Program Coordinator reports to the Director of CWC and will work alongside global experts in Counter Wildlife Trafficking, CWC Research & Analytics and Site Protection. The role acts as a ‘force multiplier’ for the global experts, aiming to significantly impact the high number and range of threats to wild cats. The Coordinator will oversee CWC activities that support Panthera’s species and regional objectives and goals, ensuring that best practices and consistent approaches in CWC are implemented across project areas. The position holder will coordinate closely with CA Regional and Country Directors and Managers. Position: Southeast Asia Counter Wildlife Crime (CWC) Program Coordinator Geographic Scope: Thailand and Malaysia Location: Thailand and Malaysia (Remote) Position Type: Full-Time Integrate CWC in Southeast Asia regional planning and implementation. Support CWC Capacity Building. Manage CWC specific grants and contracts. Regional Travel. Master’s degree or at least 6 years of relevant professional experience in major law enforcement agency, preferably with experience in multiple department/divisions and with proven management skills, or equivalent experience in wildlife crime prevention; Experience in countering wildlife crime or organized crime; Fluency in verbal and written English and proficiency in Thai or Malay; Experience in international assistance projects or CWC projects, with a deep understanding of how to effectively manage multi-sector relationships; Proven ability to train and mentor law enforcement and partner NGOs; Ability to take on new skills; Natural problem-solving ability; Strong project management skills, with ability to multitask and work creatively and efficiently under deadlines; Experience in management of small teams both remotely and in-person; Superior interpersonal and communication skills; Ability to operate under minimal supervision and remain focused on operational objectives; Ability to assimilate project findings into accurate and detailed reports; and Experience with grant budgeting and reporting. Learn more about the role and Apply Here