Share Your Work in a Conservation Technology Video Do you have photos and videos of your conservation tech work? We want to include them in a conservation technology showcase video Dear Community, Our names are Robin Marti, Christopher Bernzen, and Sem Huisintveld, and we are currently third-year students pursuing a degree in Global Project and Change Management at Zwolle, Netherlands. We are participating in a semester program called “Value Creators” (https://www.valuecreators-whc.com/), where we focus on topics related to the Sustainable Development Goals. Our mission is to research, investigate, and network to gain a deep understanding of our chosen topic, and ultimately, identify new opportunities and propose solutions to create value in that area. We have chosen to work on the intersection of technology and wildlife conservation, a field that greatly interests and excites us. After several months of research and networking, we believe the most impactful way we can contribute as students is by creating a video to raise awareness about the current technologies available for wildlife preservation. Therefore, we are inviting the WILDLABS community to contribute to this video and showcase the different technologies you use in your conservation work, including Camera Traps, GIS, Acoustic Monitoring, Tags, Drones, and more. If you'd like to be included in the video, your and/or your organization's work will be highlighted, offering a valuable networking opportunity and fostering unity and communication within the sector. You can participate by: Emailing a video of your in-field work or project-specific achievements to "robin.marti.sarasa@windesheim.nl" with information on how you'd like to be credited Dropping a photo, video, or link in the comments of this thread with information on how you'd like to be credited Taking a brief video that introduces yourself, your research/organization's mission and goals, the technology you use, insights on future technology development trends, and any additional relevant information. Please send all video material before the 31st of May. Don't hesitate to reach out if you're interested or have any questions. We look forward to collaborating with you and including your work in this important showcase! Emails: sem.huisintveld@windesheim.nl / chris.bernzen@windesheim.nl / robin.marti.sarasa@windesheim.nl We hope to collaborate with you and grow this community! #tech4wildlife Kind regards.