New WildLabs Funding & Finance group WildLabs will soon launch a 'Funding and Finance' group. What would be your wish list for such a group? Would you be interested in co-managing or otherwise helping out? WildLabs will soon launch a discussion group on funding and finance. Obviously, it will be a place where funding and finance opportunities will be published and gathered ( duh... ). Besides that, we have some other ideas ( see below ). But what would you expect from such a group? How could it help you achieving your conservation goals? If the sky is the limit, what would be your wish list? Please post your reply as a comment below or send me a private message. The group would greatly benefit from having a small team of managers, rather than just me. It's simply more productive, offers more continuity and would be a lot of fun. So, we are looking for one or two co-managers, willing to spend a couple of hours per week. Check out the call for managers to see what else it involves. If you are interested, then please use the link on the call page to fill out the application form to show your interest. If the role of co-manager does not suit you, but you would be willing to otherwise lend a hand, then please leave a comment or send me a message. For example, the group could use a logo, people for brainstorms, people with contacts in funding organizations, and people who could share their experiences with funding applications and other funding activities. If you might be interested in a particular role, but would like to know more first, then please leave your question below, or send me a message and we can have a chat. Looking forward to kicking this group off, hopefully with your help! Frank Current ideas for the group - feel very welcome to provide feedback on these : Finding new open calls for funding and finance proposals. As you may have noticed, I already started publishing some in the past few weeks. If you have any tips, send me a message please, or post a funding post yourself. Peer review of draft project applications through on-line meetups Invite speakers for webinars from donor and finance organizations to talk about: their view on applications from the donors' side, trends in funding for nature conservation, upcoming events that they want to promote, and more. If you have other ideas, feel free to add them in the comments. Feet-on-the-table sessions. See if donor/finance organizations are interested in listening to and discussing with ( potential ) applicants from conservation tech about what they ( the applicants ) feel should be funded and what their problems are. Photo :  Jitu Mondal PS Sorry for spamming this message across all WildLabs groups. Funding is an ongoing if not primary concern for all groups if not all nature conservation, and we wanted to make sure to reach the widest audience within WildLabs, and funding . I checked if it was okay and was allowed to go ahead.