Accepting Applications: ArcGIS Solutions for Protected Area Management The Esri Conservation Program is now accepting applications for grant assistance to access its ArcGIS Solutions for Protected Area Management Application. This system provides access to a suite of both mobile and web apps aimed at making conservation area management more efficient, transparent, and effective. In partnership with National Geographic, this platform also incorporates a unique blend of storytelling and geospatial technology to bring interest and awareness to conservation management issues. Poaching, deforestation, the expanding human footprint and climate change are among the rising threats to biodiversity globally.  As these threats lead to increased fragmentation of critical habitats and the loss of key species, it’s critical to reverse the trend with time-tested, intelligent systems which enable informed and timely management decisions. ArcGIS for Protected Area Management provides area managers with a configured suite of apps which support key workflows essential for managing natural areas. The program includes a secure and flexible framework for deploying focused apps which have been designed to empower key individuals to optimize operations. ArcGIS for Protected Area Management allows protected area management staff to work more effectively and transparently on conservation area management challenges both within and beyond a park boundary. The ArcGIS Solutions for Protected Area Management aims to advance partnerships, technologies, capacity and methods for management and storytelling to preserve and sustain natural areas. Secure cloud-based content management Living Atlas content Configurable Mobile and Web Apps Analysis app Role-based access Basic internet/network coverage Smart phones Computers Training Implementation and enablement service offerings Solution Templates (coming soon) DIY implementation guides Community support Solutions learning pathways Volunteer support CyberTracker directly integrates with the Conservation Intelligence Solutions and apps. Learn more here. Microsoft's AI for Earth program supports Conservation Intelligence Platform's infrastructure on Azure and provides machine learning capabilites. Visit the AI for Earth website for more information. Building upon decades of collaboration, Esri and the National Geographic Society have formed a strategic partnership to provide advanced solutions for managing protected areas. Through the alignment of Esri’s leading geospatial technology and the National Geographic Society’s expertise in storytelling to illuminate the issues our planet is facing today, our organizations are committed to advancing partnerships, technologies, capacity and methods for management and storytelling to preserve and sustain natural areas. For full details about ArcGIS Solutions, visit the Esri website here. To apply for the ArcGIS Solutions grant, click here.