SMART Partnership Director The SMART Partnership is hiring a Program Director to oversee all aspects of the partnership's operations Deadline: 


            22 March 2024
      
         
            - the deadline has passed.
           
        
    

    
    
        


            Remote/Flexible Location: Flexible Salary: Salary based on experience Position: Full-time The SMART Partnership The SMART Partnership (smartconservationtools.org) is a unique collaboration of conservation organizations that share a mission to protect wildlife and its habitat in protected areas by empowering conservationists with the data, technology, skills and understanding necessary to make the best possible use of available resources. Central to the Partnership is the SMART software platform, which has become the most widely adopted tool globally (over 1200 sites in 100+ countries) for monitoring, evaluating and improving the effectiveness of law enforcement and management in protected areas.

The Partnership develops and maintains the SMART software platform, promotes the use of SMART software, supports training and capacity building in SMART implementation and associated best practices for protected area management, provides tools to secure adoption of SMART by implementing agencies, collaborates with other related and complementary initiatives, develops standards for protected area operation, and facilitates outreach and coordination between existing and potential SMART users. Re:wild Re:wild protects and restores the wild. We have a singular and powerful focus: the wild as the most effective solution to the interconnected climate, biodiversity and human health crises. Founded by a group of renowned conservation scientists together with Leonardo DiCaprio, Re:wild is a force multiplier that brings together Indigenous peoples, local communities, influential leaders, nongovernmental organizations, governments, companies and the public to protect and rewild at the scale and speed we need. Learn more at rewild.org. Re:wild is the hiring partner for this position and will host the position on behalf of the SMART Partnership. Program Director - SMART Partnership The role of the SMART Partnership is to support the implementation, sustainability and effective use of SMART at site and national levels. While all SMART Partnership members are engaged in implementing SMART at various sites around the world, Partnership activities typically do not include site-level SMART implementation, other than facilitation and support of SMART trainings and activities. The SMART Partnership Director is integral to the success of the SMART Partnership and the implementation of SMART globally. This position plays a leading role in future development of SMART, support of Partnership activities, and ensuring the effectiveness of SMART tools. The Director reports directly to the SMART Partnership Steering Committee, a group composed of representatives from each of the SMART Partnership members. While the Director reports to the Steering Committee, the position will be a Re:wild employee. Work will be remote. Position Objectives: The SMART Partnership Director Position Will Have Five Main Objectives: Oversee and coordinate implementation of SMART Partnership activities, as outlined in the SMART Strategic Plan. Identify and secure funding for Partnership activities. Empower, strengthen, and grow a high-performing collaboration, team, and culture, operating with a shared vision. Facilitate effective adoption of SMART by implementing agencies and organizations by supporting the development of supporting tools, materials and training. Support and contribute to the future development of SMART software. Institutional role The SMART Partnership Director will be a Re:wild employee, acting on behalf of the SMART Partnership, with administrative oversight by the Re:wild Steering Committee representative. The SMART Partnership Director will report to the SMART Steering Committee concerning SMART Partnership activities as outlined in the Strategic Plan and as directed by the Steering Committee. The Steering Committee will approve an annual work plan for the SMART Partnership Director and the SMART Partnership Director will be required to provide quarterly updates on progress through remote conference calls with the Steering Committee. Specific Responsibilities: Ensure accountability for SMART’s strategic plan, progress, and impact, in collaboration with the Steering Committee and Councils. Develop SMART internal capacity, ensuring that people and resources are aligned to deliver on the SMART strategic plan and commitments to partners and funders, provide leadership and direction for those involved in the SMART Partnership governance structure. Maintain and cultivate a high-performing collaboration, team, and culture, operating with a shared goal; facilitate processes (e.g., work planning, organizational structures), encourage collaboration and navigate conflict. Ensure and promote strong cross-cutting collaboration and internal coordination across the SMART Partnership (e.g., between and within the Steering Committee, Councils and Task Forces). Maintain, refine, and implement vision, value proposition, and strategic plan, working with the SC and chairs, to develop clear direction. Continue to clarify SMART’s value proposition and position in the broader ecosystem. Identify opportunities to expand and deepen SMART’s partnership opportunities & services. Ensure strong and transparent governance of the SMART Partnership through regular reporting on progress against goals. Maintain and update the SMART Partnership Membership Agreement. Maintain and update the SMART Partnership’s Strategic Plan, budget and expenditures. Organize and help facilitate an annual in-person Steering Committee meeting. Oversee and coordinate the SMART Councils (e.g.,Technology Council, Capacity Council), including serving ex-officio on each Council and ensuring all Councils deliver on agreed quarterly outcomes. Serve as the initial point of contact for potential SMART users and organizations that are not current SMART Partners. Oversee the monitoring and evaluation of SMART. Identify new funding sources for implementation of Partnership activities as outlined in the SMART Strategic Plan and as agreed by the SMART Steering Committee. Raise necessary funds to implement Partnership activities defined in the SMART Strategic Plan, including the coordination of proposals and reports in collaboration with the relevant SMART Partners and Councils. Manage all grants and activities of the SMART Partnership according to budget, timelines and deliverables/agreed outcomes. In collaboration with SMART Technology Council and SMART Chief Technology Officer, contribute to ongoing and future development of SMART software. Coordinate internal and field testing of new software functionality. Conduct or oversee market research to track user engagement and uptake. In liaison with SMART Technology Council and SMART Chief Technology Officer, develop and manage contracts with developers. In collaboration with SMART’s Capacity Council and Chief Capacity Officer, contribute to the development, delivery, and promotion of SMART’s capacity building activities, including but not restricted to learning curricula, training materials, best practice guidance, online learning platforms, training events, and competency standards. Support coordination and implementation of capacity building projects and products. Manage contracts with capacity delivery partners. Facilitate alignment between SMART’s capacity activities and the Partnership’s other activities. Represent for SMART to key audiences including strategic partners, funders, users; position as thought leader; tell a compelling story of how the SMART Partnership’s work positively impacts individuals, sites, species, conservation more broadly. Chair and manage the Marketing and Communications Council. Manage marketing and communication activities, including materials development, visibility opportunities, social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Instagram), and outreach and information sharing activities. Develop content for and produce marketing pieces (e.g., annual report, PowerPoints, brochures). Oversee management of the SMART Partnership website and keep it current. Respond to and/or coordinate communications and media opportunities that arise. Support and maintain active dialogue among Partnership Members and between SMART Partnership Members and donors concerning implementation of Business Plan activities and other SMART-related activities. Actively engage new SMART Partners and coordinate incoming enquiries from prospective partners and other parties interested in SMART. Assist existing SMART Partners to broaden the exposure and support of SMART within the context of their respective organizations, for both implementation and funding opportunities. Requirements: Commitment to and passion for both SMART and Re:wild’s mission, vision, and values. 5+ years of experience in conservation with proven skills in conservation technology. Field experience in the protected and conserved area and/or wildlife crime prevention field required. Demonstrated fundraising ability. Strong communications and storytelling skills, including writing, correspondence, and public speaking. Ability to work independently but also as part of a team. Ability to speak other languages preferred. Qualified candidates are asked to submit a cover letter and résumé (one document) to careers@rewild.org no later than March 22, 2024. Please include “Program Director, SMART Partnership” in the subject line.