Welcome to the homepage for CEESP-related webinars - Check back here for regular updates!

 

IUCN CEESP: Reimagine Webinar Series

Throughout 2024, various IUCN CEESP Group Chairs will be hosting a collection of webinars. These webinars aim to enhance knowledge about the work being done by different CEESP Chairs across topics.

The Fuller Seminar Series: Beyond Inclusive Conservation

The WWF Fuller Fund, in conjunction with IUCN CEESP, is delighted to share a variety of webinars from January to May 2024 as part of the 'Beyond Inclusive Conservation' Fuller Seminar Series. Please read more and register for any of the sessions here. 


Inclusive conservation—conservation that acknowledges and supports the rights, needs, visions, voices, and leadership of local populations and communities in the protection and management of nature—is key to achieving positive outcomes for both biodiversity and people. Indeed, those working toward global conservation goals broadly recognize the need to embrace inclusive conservation.

 

In recent years, conservation organizations have made concerted efforts to promote equitable governance, adopt human rights-based approaches, and advance Indigenous Peoples and local community-led conservation. This work requires integrating insights into diverse community perspectives, cultural values, knowledge systems, and local approaches to conservation. Even with these efforts, there are still substantive knowledge and capacity gaps in how to move inclusive conservation forward.

 

Bridging the theoretical with the practical, this seminar series will help the broader conservation community advance its inclusive conservation efforts and provide insights from science for policy and practice. Topics will include human rights, gender, human well-being, governance, Indigenous-led conservation, culture, and inclusive conservation science. (WWF The Fuller Fund)


 

Upcoming webinars: 

 

Sharing Power and Capacity for More Inclusive Conservation Governance (Fuller Seminar Series)

March 14, 2024 | 7:00 AM PT/10:00 AM ET

Speakers:

Anne Larson, CIFOR
Phil Franks, International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED)
Bram Buscher, Waginengen University
Mere Takako, Conservation International
Register Here

 

The Intersection of Culture and Conservation (Fuller Seminar Series)

April 25, 2024 | 7:00 AM PT/10:00 AM ET

Speakers:

Jules Pretty, University of Essex
Ron Vave, East Carolina University
Mehana Blaich Vaughan, University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa
Rachel Dacks, University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa
Register Here

 

Recognizing and Bolstering Indigenous Peoples and Local Community Leadership in Conservation (Fuller Seminar Series)

May 16, 2024 | 7:00 AM PT/10:00 AM ET

Speakers: TBD

Register Here

 

Towards a More Inclusive Conservation Science (Fuller Seminar Series)

May 30, 2024 | 7:00 AM PT/10:00 AM ET

Speakers: 

Gabby Ahmadia, World Wildlife Fund
Asha De Vos, OceanSwell
Anne Salomon, Simon Fraser University
Philile Mbatha, University of Cape Town, One Ocean Hub
Register Here

 

Previous webinars: 

November 29, 2023: A Global Spotlight on Ocean Defenders 

Host: Nathan Bennett, Chair of People and the Ocean Specialist Group 

Description: This webinar aims to bring greater visibility to the plight of Ocean Defenders worldwide. Ocean Defenders include individuals, groups, and communities of small-scale fishers and Indigenous Peoples actively protecting the marine environment and human rights. Unfortunately, ocean defenders are often marginalized, criminalized, threatened, and even murdered for their efforts to safeguard the ocean. This webinar will explore the ongoing struggles and efforts of ocean defenders globally, and shed light on the potential avenues through which allies and organizations can provide support and protect ocean defenders. This webinar will be of interest to a diverse audience of ocean defenders, conservation practitioners, researchers, policy-makers, and funders who are committed to protecting oceans and people.





 

 

 

Centering Human Rights in Conservation (Fuller Seminar Series)

January 18, 2024 |  7:00 AM PT/10:00 AM ET

Speakers:

Patrick Smallhorn West, James Cook University
Jennifer Tauli-Corpuz, IUCN CEESP
Elisa Morgera, One Ocean Hub, Strathclyde School of Law
Watch Here

 

Green Criminology in Action (IUCN CEESP Reimagine)

On 31 January 2024, we invite you to our online webinar on Green Criminology, an analytical and interdisciplinary framework from across the social and natural sciences, concerned with environmental crimes and harms, including risks and transgressions that are harmful to humans, ecosystems, and non-human animals, regardless of legality. This webinar aims to offer an introduction to Green Criminology, to discuss why this movement is relevant to the mission and work of IUCN, and to explore on-the-ground topics of research across different geographic contexts and case studies to provide insightful analysis of these challenges. Speakers will present on environmental crime, southern perspectives, ecophilosophies, environmental ethics, engagement with local communities, criminal networks, and wildlife crime, among other relevant areas. This webinar will be of interest to young scholars, environmental defenders, conservation practitioners, researchers, and policy-makers concerned with the political, social, cultural, and economic relationships in society that produce socio-ecological harm.

January 31, 2024 | 10AM EST 

 

Inés Arroyo-Quiroz, UNAM & Co-chair IUCN Green Criminology Specialist Group
Daan Van Uhm, Utrecht University & Co-chair IUCN Green Criminology Specialist Group
Carolina Sanchez, Utrecht University
Judith Rakowski, University of Maryland 
Watch Here

 

Advancing Gender Transformative Approaches to Conservation (Fuller Seminar Series)

February 15, 2024 | 7:00 AM PT/10:00 AM ET

Speakers:

Marlene Elias, CIAT
Jacqueline Lau, James Cook University
Jamie Wen-Besson, IUCN AGENT Program
Watch Here

 

Incorporating Human Wellbeing for More Equitable Conservation (Fuller Seminar Series)

February 29, 2024 | 7:00 AM PT/10:00 AM ET

Speakers:

Emily Woodhouse, University College London
David Gill, Duke University
Natalie Ban, University of Victoria
Craig Leisher, The Nature Conservancy
Watch Here