NEW DELHI: In a timely rescue operation, Anant Ambani’s Vantara mobilised from Gujarat a large convoy of vehicles, including ambulances, feed vehicles, and a team of personnel, to rehabilitate an ailing elephant and her calf in Tripura's Unakoti district.

An online video showing the rescue and rehabilitation effort has gone viral. 
In the video, a woman -- later identified as 'Go Green and Help Stray Animals' organisation general secretary Kuntala Sinha -- can be heard thanking Anant Ambani and Vantara's team of doctors for their prompt action and saving the elephants.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreShe said the Vantara team reached Unakoti within a day of her approaching them for help in treating the elephant.

The convoy made the remarkable 3,500-km journey from Jamnagar to Tripura in a mere 24 hours to provide essential care for Pratima and her calf Maniklal.
After the initial treatment, the elephants were kept in Tripura's Kailashahar for several weeks before being transported to Vantara in Gujarat for further care.
A veterinary surgeon from Vantara found several wounds and lacerations on Pratima, as well as severe stiffness in the limbs, and blindness in one eye. Pratima was emaciated while her calf was also suffering from lack of nutrition.
According to a release by PETA, Pratima and her calf were being unlawfully held without an ownership certificate, violating wildlife protection laws. 
About Vantara
Meaning 'Star of The Forest', Vantara is a wildlife preservation initiative founded by Anant Ambani and backed by Reliance Industries and Reliance Foundation.
Situated within the expansive Jamnagar Refinery Complex, spanning a vast 3,000 acres, Vantara serves as a sanctuary for animals enduring abuse, injury, or facing extinction.
Vantara was started with a mission to extend compassionate care and cutting-edge medical support to animals in distress. With a holistic approach to rehabilitation, it provides a natural and nurturing environment for its residents, fostering their physical and emotional well-being. Vantara is poised to spearhead global efforts in wildlife rehabilitation.
(With inputs from agencies)