NEW DELHI: Ritik Chaudhary, a farmer from Bulandshahr, had been visiting Baby Care New Born Hospital in Vivek Vihar daily for the past week, paying Rs 10,000 each time to see his baby, who was experiencing breathing difficulties and other issues. On Sunday, unaware of the tragic fire that had engulfed the hospital the night before, Chaudhary was on his way to get his child discharged for a ceremony back home. 
He learned about the deadly blaze from a cousin in Delhi and arrived at the hospital to discover that his baby was among those who had perished. Chaudhary had not yet found the strength to inform his wife and family about the heartbreaking loss.

Many family members of the survivors and the deceased only found out about the incident on Sunday morning. Pawan Kasana, a 27-year-old UP Police constable from Baghpat, lost his six-day-old daughter, who was being treated for an infection, in the fire. Kasana was on election duty when he heard about the birth of his first child and had not even seen her once. The family had yet to inform the baby's mother, Bharti, about the tragedy, blaming the hospital's negligence for the child's death.

The situation outside a nearby rescue centre where some of the rescued babies were taken was chaotic. Rajkumar, 26, from Ghaziabad, shared his story: "I admitted my baby girl four days ago as she had fever. She was supposed to be discharged today. I've been frantically running from hospital to mortuary to the rescue centre, trying to find out if my child has survived. I have been looking at photos, videos and body tags." Rajkumar and his wife had lost their first child, and the family was praying that their baby girl was alive, but police said they could only confirm her well-being after a DNA match.

Every family at the scene and mortuary expressed one significant regret: that they weren't present to try and save their little ones. The hospital allegedly only allowed families to visit the babies between 2 pm and 4 pm when they collected the daily bills. Shakuntla, a relative, said, "If they couldn't protect our children, why did they tell us to leave? We could have slept on the road. We regret spending so much and putting our child in a private unit. Our baby might have been safer in a govt hospital; at least they would have let us see her, at least they would have informed us when it happened."

The scene at GTB Hospital mortuary was heart-rending, with wails and cries of despair all around. 
Amit Sharma, a relative of one of the infants who passed away, revealed that the family had already endured the loss of two children. 
"The previous year, they experienced the tragic loss of a stillborn baby, and prior to that, they suffered the heartbreaking loss of another child shortly after conception. The child's father, Vinod Sharma, operates an online business," Sharma said.

Shahnaaz Khatoon, 44, the grandmother of a five-day-old baby, said: 'When our grandchild fell sick, hum paise ke peeche nahi gaye, bache ke peeche gaye' (we didn't think about the money, but only about our child). We were referred from a hospital in Bhajanpura to this facility. We did everything we could, collecting money every 24 hours, spending thousands by borrowing or dipping into savings. Imagine hearing about the death of your own child through a newspaper?"
Could've saved kids if we were there: Kin 
Many families found out about the incident only on Sunday morning. They all expressed regret that they weren't present to try and save their babies. The hospital allegedly only allowed families to visit for two hours when they collected daily bills.