VISAKHAPATNAM: Around 25 youths from Vizag and other parts of Andhra Pradesh, who were rescued and repatriated from their captors in Cambodia through the joint efforts of Indian embassy in Phnom Penh and Cambodian authorities, landed in the city on Friday evening.
The Indian embassy in Cambodia assisted the youths, who fell victim to fraudulent employment scams in the Southeast Asian country, with legal paperwork for their swift return.It may be recalled that Vizag police recently unearthed a human trafficking racket being operated by some Indian agents in Cambodia and arrested three of their local contacts - Chukka Rajesh, Sabbavarapu Kondalarao, and Mannena Gnaneshwar.
‘Rescue from Cambodia is like a second life for us’
The trio used to lure unemployed and tech savvy youngsters by promising them good money for data entry jobs in Cambodia. But once they landed there, they were forced to work in cybercrime syndicates. 
One of the victims, who did not wish to be named, said he never thought he would get out alive from there. “This is like a second life for us. It was like hell there. We were held captive, our passports were taken away, we were tortured and beaten with baseball bats. Forget salaries, we were denied food sometimes. I was so happy when I got an employment opportunity abroad, but the joy was short-lived. I was promised a salary of $1,200 per month, but I did not get a single penny from June to Nov. We were forced to slog for 10 to 12 hours per day and there are no holidays,” he said. 
Another victim said there still hundreds of Indians, including several from AP, still being forced to work for the cybercrime syndicates there. “We knew it was wrong, but we had no option. We were forced to commit cyber frauds to survive in that hell. When we left for Cambodia, we were told we would be working for a company dealing with software operations. But after reaching there, we were given training on how to conduct cybercrime operations by a Chinese national. If anyone protested, he was tortured and tied and not given any food. Not even water,” he said.
He, however, said those who “fall in line”, get good money and a share of the profits. “Employees who meet the targets, which means you commit more number of cyber frauds, get a good share of the ill-gotten money and are also allowed to visit pubs and casinos, and other places of entertainment,” he said. He said their “job training” included picking “prospective clients” in Andhra Pradesh and other parts of the country, send them messages offering part time jobs, or coax them to invest in stocks, or extract money from them by threatening to implicate them in FedEx courier scam, money laundering or cryptocurrency scam. 
“Each employee is given a fake name, which is meant to hide our original identity. Every employee must meet their target (duping people by various means) on a daily basis. We were tortured, denied food, and confined to a dark room for hours for not meeting the target,” said another victim. Explaining the modus operandi of the fraud companies, he said a Chinese national sends messages on various apps which all employees are forced to join. “The messages are in Chinese and later translated into English. The employees are then asked to form different Telegram groups involving the prospective victims,” he said. 
Vizag police chief Dr A Ravi Shankar said nearly 70% of financial frauds targeting Vizagites originate from Southeast Asian countries like Cambodia. “Cybercrooks looted over Rs 120 crore from Vizagites in the past one year. One person lost Rs 3.2 crore to FedEx courier scam on Thursday (May 23),” he added.