Patiala: Of the five labourers trapped under the rubble of Thursday evening’s house collapse at Ropar’s Preet Colony, the rescue operation has saved one in 19 hours, while three have died and sniffer dogs search for the fifth. The house contractor and owner were booked.
The roof’s concrete had aged rapidly due to a local problem of swamping, which had triggered this collapse.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoAsked how the rescue operation had progressed, Ropar’s additional deputy commissioner (general) Pooja Syal Garewal said: "The first labourer taken out of the debris has survived, while the next three have succumbed to their injuries. Sniffer dogs are helping us locate the last, while the rescue teams have worked tirelessly.” Ropar deputy commissioner Preeti Yadav and senior superintendent of police (SSP) Gulneet Singh Khurana oversee the rescue operation that involves the National Disaster Response Force (NDRF), State Disaster Response Force (SDRF), and Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP).
The house had collapsed around 4pm on Thursday, and by 7pm, the rescuers had pulled out one labourer and moved him to Chandigarh’s Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER). The second labourer moved there was declared dead on arrival, the third was found dead on the disaster’s site, and the fourth was declared dead at the civil hospital on Friday morning. The rescue effort for the fifth is running on hope.
The collapsed residential structure was of two floors, and frequent logging of water had prompted the house owner to lift the lintel level, which had caused the collapse. The victims were Ramesh Kumar (39) of Karnal, Kaka ‘Kartik’ (23) of Ambala, and Sahil Kumar (23) of Ambala, while Abhishek Kumar of Ambala remains under the rubble and Azeem Nazim of Uttar Pradesh is under treatment at the PGI.
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreFor precaution’s sake, the district officials have evacuated the left section of the neighbouring house because the collapse has weakened its integrity. Booked under sections 304-A (causing death by negligence), 337 (causing injuries by negligence), and 338 (causing grievous hurt) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC), house owner Sukhwinder Singh and work contractor Sunil are yet to be arrested.
Pulkit, a neighbour who was first responder to the collapse, said: “One of the labourers, Kaka, was alive when we checked the debris within minutes of the collapse. He even responded to us from under the rubble and we assured him that help was on its way. The locals supported the fire department’s rescue operation before the SDRF and the NDRF came over.” Survivor Nazim had arm injuries, while Sahil couldn’t reach the PGI alive, and Kaka died despite being retrieved. Pulkit claimed that: “The owner had started to lift his house lintel to solve the local problem of swamping.”
About the operational difficulties, ADC Pooja said: “The rescue teams have removed most of the debris. The task is manual because a JCB can’t be deployed, but the rescue team has the best safety gear. Our priority is to save the one man who is still buried alive. The quick response of the SDRF, NDRF, and ITBP teams from Jalandhar and Nalagarh, and the dog squad helped us save a life.”
She claimed that Preet Colony was ill planned, while the house built in 1983 was now more than 40 years old. She said: “After recent floods, the owner might have found the need to lift the lintel level. We will gather technical evidence, while two families have claimed their dead after autopsy.” 
The health department has a medical team posted on the spot since Thursday, ready with two ambulances and a standby squad at Ropar’s civil hospital.
On Jan 2, 2023, a showroom had collapsed in Sector 126, Kharar, during the construction of its illegal first floor, killing one of the labourers.