‘Neem Phooler Madhu’ is currently witnessing a thrilling period in its storyline. As per the current track of the popular Bengali television show, Barsha’s marriage with Arnab is on the rocks. Barsha married Arnab going against her own will, as per her mother Krishna’ wishes. Barsha fell in love with Piklu, Parna’s brother. But Krishna did not approve of that relationship and got her daughter married to Arnab.Once the wedding was over, Arnab returned home without taking Barsha along with him as her father Amitesh was arrested due to a false allegation. One Amitesh walked out of jail, Krishna asked Barsha to go to her in-laws’ house. Barsha did as her mother wished, but in vain.

 At present, Barsha has gotten to know about Arnab’s relationship with his cousin Sohini. As Barsha discovered the truth, Arnab hit her on her head and sent her to certain red-light area. As Barsha went missing, Parna and Srijan lodged a diary at the police station. On one hand, Parna’s suspicion on Arnab kept piling up. On the other hand, Parna hatches her own plan to look for Barsha. Parna and Srijan get to know that Barsha has been sold to a brothel. Parna, Srijan and others reach the red-light area as vaccination volunteers. After encountering a few bumps on the way, Parna finally rescues Barsha from the gunpoint. Parna brings Barsha back home and exposes Arnab before everyone in the family. Will Barsha go back to her in-laws’ place after all this?
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More
 ‘Neem Phooler Madhu’ is one of the most talked-about serials on Bengali television. Actress Pallavi Sharma plays the character of Parna on the show, and Rubel Das essays the character of Srijan. The romantic drama is based on the backdrop of an arranged marriage. Alokparna, known as Parna, gets married to Srijan who lives in a joint family. Because of their differences in nature, Parna finds it difficult to adjust to her in-law’s house. Moreover, she doesn’t get along well with her mother-in-law either. Despite the stark differences in their nature, Parna and Srijan make an effort and find companionship and fall in love with each other. ‘Neem Phooler Madhu’ took a leap of five years adding Parna and Srijan’s daughter Sriparna to the storyline.