NEW DELHI: Firefighters and locals faced a daunting task as the hospital quickly became engulfed in flames. Despite the challenges, they managed to rescue around a dozen infants through their bravery and quick thinking, although not all could be saved.
Fire chief Atul Garg described their strategy, which involved setting up two teams. “One team started firefighting because there was a blast of cylinders...PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNothere was, in fact, a chain of blasts... So, we had to save the firemen as well. The second team simultaneously started rescue operations for babies,” he explained. 
The firefighters, unable to enter through the front, accessed the building from the rear with the help of a ladder provided by a local resident. They entered through the windows and carefully handed the babies to the residents outside, who then rushed them to another hospital. “We removed all 12 babies from the burning hospital, but unfortunately, we could not save all of them,” Garg added.
The residents of C Block in Vivek Vihar were quick to respond to the emergency. Inderpreet Singh and several women placed a ladder against the building, receiving the infants from the firefighters and transporting them to hospitals in their vehicles.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreVinay Narang, the RWA president of Vivek Vihar, shared his experience with TOI. Awakened by screams and explosions, he attempted to enter the hospital but found no way in. “I navigated through the chaos, with nurses breaking glass from behind to evacuate the children. I took five children from their hands and put them in my car, rushing them to a hospital. Sadly, one of them died due to lack of oxygen,” he recounted. Narang also described how they blocked the road to protect motorists and pedestrians from the exploding cylinders, which were flung hundreds of meters away. He questioned the legality and safety of refuelling cylinders on the ground floor of such a sensitive area and called for govt action to prevent similar tragedies.
Jitender Singh Shunty, a local politician, also participated in the rescue and relief operations alongside his son, alerting ambulances to transport the babies to another hospital. Nurses from the hospital assisted in the rescue efforts, unlocking cabins to remove the infants. Arunima Sharma, a school administrator from Dilshad Garden, joined the nursing attendants in rushing the babies to another hospital in Narang's car. These courageous actions led to the miraculous survival of at least five babies. Dinesh Kumar, a 42-year-old man, expressed relief upon learning that his eight-day-old niece had been rescued from the blaze. “I was delivering milk in the area when I saw a crowd at the hospital and informed my brother, Madhuraj. We were so relieved to know she had been rescued,” he said.