NEW DELHI: The night of June 9, 2023, still gives jitters to firefighters at Dwarka fire station. It was half-past-one when a chilling SOS was sent out from ‘The Nest’, a neonatal facility in Dwarka. Fifty firefighters manning nine tenders rushed to the spot, covering the 6km distance in five minutes. For the next 45 minutes, they displayed immense grit and presence of mind, safely rescuing 19 newborns from the inferno.
The firemen recalled how they had put their lives on the line to rescue the babies.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo“The entrance was blocked and smoke had engulfed the entire building. However, we didn't blink twice because the lives of newborns were at stake,” a member of that team recalled.
According to Delhi Fire Services chief, Atul Garg, the furniture in the basement was burning rapidly, leading to the upper floors getting clogged with smoke. “Time was of utmost importance. While one team began to douse the blaze, the other started the rescue and evacuation operation. Our firemen put on the breathing apparatus and entered the burning hospital,” he said.
It was chaotic. On the first floor, smoke had engulfed the corridors. “The nurses and doctors told us 20 newborns, some as young as two days old, were inside. We had breathing apparatus on, but the nurses didn't. We told the staff to cover their faces with cloth. Some babies were on medical support. We unplugged medical equipment and broke windows. Then, we used a narrow gallery with an iron mesh bridge as an escape route,” recalled a fireman.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More One by one, the firefighters lifted the babies in their arms, wrapped them in towels, and began to move out. The infants were carefully transferred to a nearby restaurant. From there, ambulances transported them to other hospitals for further care. “All newborns remained unharmed. Three were subsequently discharged, 13 were moved to Arya Hospital in Janakpuri, two to Dwarka More Newborn Child Hospital, and two were taken to JK Hospital in Janakpuri,” Garg added. The fire, believed to be caused by a short circuit, was contained within an hour, and a cooling operation was initiated.
Police had booked the owner of the hospital, who had claimed that no fire NOC was required as his building was less than 9m in height. In any case, this close call should have served as a stark reminder of the importance of fire safety regulations, particularly in facilities caring for vulnerable populations. Exactly a year later, the incident at the facility in Vivek Vihar has rekindled the memories.