HYDERABAD: Donning an army uniform, 22-year-old Mohd Sufiyan, has made a desparate plea from Russia along the Ukraine border: “Please save us. We are victims of a fraud.”
Russia is at war with Ukraine and Mohd Sufiyan who hails from Narayanpet district in Telangana has unwittingly got caught in it. In fact, he along with many other Indians, have been recruited to actually be part of a private army in Russia.The shocked families of those who have been lured into taking up a job in Russia suspect that they have been recruited into the Wagner army, a private army funded by the Russian government. 
The youth who were sent to Russia were trapped in Dubai with the promises of earning much larger amount than what they were earning. After they came to India in November/December 2023 from Dubai, a group of four youth, were sent to Russia in December 2023. They boarded a flight from Chennai.
On realising that they had been trapped in the name of being provided jobs as security personnel or helpers but have been drafted into a private army without as much as their consent, two of them have reportedly come back to India. One was from Jammu and another from Ahmedabad in Gujarat.
Those who are stuck now in Russia, are three youth from Kalaburagi in Karnataka and one from Telangana. In addition to these, there are said to be at least another 60 youth from India drafted into the private army without their consent. Their signatures were allegedly taken on a contract written in Russian language. The luring into taking up ‘security/helper’ jobs is taking place through Youtube, where a vlogger is showing them how they can come to Russia. Another vlogger has also exposed the fraud being perpetrated on gullible youth.
“When my brother spoke with more last, which was more than 15 days ago, he said they were just 40 km from the Ukraine border and they were there against their will having been deceived,” 31-year-old Syed Salman told TOI.
His brother who had returned home from Dubai in November 2023 told the family that he was leaving for Russia only after his documents had arrived. All the victims were taken on visitor visa and then drafted into what is being said to be the private army.
“At one opportunity that my brother got, he made use of a mobile phone belonging to a Russian armyman and sent us a message. He asked that he and other victims be helped to return to India,” he said.
For the promised ‘security/helper’ jobs, the agents in Dubai took Rs 3.5 lakh each of the youth, the victim’s families said. 
In a video that the youth from Hyderabad and another two from Karnataka made in Russia and sent to their families, they said they had fallen prey to a fraud. They also named the vloggers on Youtube who had trapped them. “Ouf of the four of us, one has been taken to another place and we do not know where he is,” one of the youth said in the video.
Hyderabad MP Asaduddin Owasi on Wednesday appealed to the Ministry of External Affairs and the Embassy of India in Moscow to rescue the youth and bring them back to India. He also wrote letters to the MEA and the Embassy of India in Moscow on January 25, 2023 seeking help for youth to return to India. He also provided the names of the agents who had lured them to Russia. 
The youth who were earning Rs 30,000 to Rs 40,000 in Dubai were promised salary up Rs 2 lakh and this is what was attractive.
In January this year, the Nepal government which came to know that several Nepali youth had also been lured into joining the Russian army urged the Russian government not to recruit Nepali youth as some of them had also died fighting. 
The families of the victims in a letter to Asaduddin Owaisi have said that the youth were drafted into a private army, possibly the Wagner private army backed by Russia.