NEW DELHI: Delhi High Court has issued a slew of directions to Delhi government to ensure that immediate financial assistance is given to rescued child labourers and back wages due to them are recovered from their employers.
The court ordered that as soon as a rescued child is placed in a childcare or juvenile home under the government, a savings bank account of the minor shall be opened jointly with the superintendent or in-charge of the child care institution for transfer of financial assistance.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
If the child’s parents or guardian are traced, the amount of financial assistance shall be transferred to them by the government one week after verification, a bench of Acting Chief Justice Manmohan and Justice Manmeet PS Arora said.
It added that in case a rescued child is repatriated to their native place, the information shall be shared by the child welfare committee with the government’s labour department so that his bank account information could be ascertained and necessary financial assistance and recovered back wages be transferred.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoWhen the child attains majority, an application shall be submitted to the bank and a permission be granted for operating his savings account as a sole individual, it said.
On recovery of back wages, the bench said the labour department shall issue recovery notices to the employers within two working days of the rescue of the child. The inspector under the Minimum Wages Act or the Payment of Wages Act will grant the accused employer/owner two weeks’ time to deposit back wages and in case of default by owner, the inspector will request the child welfare committee to recover the same as fine, the court noted.
“It is directed in case back wages are not deposited by the accused employer/owner within the stipulated period of two weeks, recovery certificates shall be issued by the authority concerned and the back wages shall be recovered as arrears of land revenue by the concerned SDM,” the court stated.
The court passed the directions while dealing with two petitions filed by the fathers of two bonded child labourers seeking statutory financial assistance for their children and several other similarly situated minors.
One of the petitions stated that there are 115 rescued children who are yet to receive their back wages and sought directions for a time-bound recovery. The other plea sought directions for payment of immediate financial rehabilitative assistance to rescued child labourers.