NAVI MUMBAI: On the occasion of International Women's Day, several self empowered women, along with Harmony Foundation, celebrated the day with the rescued destitute at the New Panvel based shelter of Social and Evangelical Association for Love (SEAL).
The women were impressed on how scores of rescued homeless persons were also reunited with their families by the SEAL Ashram workers.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
This year, the foundation carried out a two-fold celebration, highlighting the resilience and power of women worldwide.
Harmony Foundation extended its outreach to SEAL Ashram underscoring the importance of inclusivity and solidarity. In today's world, where Women's Day has become commercialised and celebrated mostly in mainstream settings, Harmony Foundation has committed itself to celebrating this special day among the destitute women of Seal Ashram. 'It symbolises our commitment to also celebrating those women who are important members of our society but are unfortunately often overlooked or forgotten in our collective consciousness,'' said the founder and chairperson of Harmony Foundation, Dr Abraham Mathai.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoCentral to the celebration was the participation of inspiring guests coming from diverse backgrounds, with the aim of sharing words of encouragement with the destitute women residents of the ashram. Among the guests who graced the event was Rajni Basumatary, a script writer, director, actor, and producer who has acted in films, including Mary Kom and in the Netflix series Rana Naidu. 
Another inspirational guest who attended the event was standup comedian Deepika Mhatre, who has been a domestic worker in Mumbai until she discovered her true talent—stand-up comedy. The event was also graced by actor Denzil Smith.
Initiating the programme with a compelling message, Dr Mathai emphasised the urgency of dismantling the barriers that divide us by gender. To set the tone for the day, the Foundation screened its film "Manchahi," underscoring the critical importance of breaking down gender-based discrimination. This is particularly pertinent in a country like India, where many girls are tragically named "Anchahi" or "unwanted."
Rajni Basumatary stated that all these categories that divide humans on the basis of gender, class, caste, race, and ethnicity need to be addressed, and we should all strive for equality to dismantle such barriers that divide humankind.
The event was enlivened with a joyful and comedic performance by Ms Deepika Mhatre, who shared her story of finding her true calling in standup comedy. Deepika thereon cheered the destitute women with her flavour of comedy and ushered a fervour of laughter among the audience.
The Harmony Foundation remains committed to advocating for gender equality and the empowerment of women from all walks of life. The foundation envisions and advocates for a world that is more inclusive and equitable, where every woman is celebrated, valued, and given the opportunity to thrive.