Thiruvananthapuram: At a time when the human-wildlife conflict is at its zenith in the state and people are enraged over the govt’s failure to safeguard the lives and properties of citizens, the Animal Welfare Board of India (AWBI) has written to the fire and rescue services to offer its services in rescuing animals — both wild and domestic — that are falling prey to accidents in human inhabited areas. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Animals are widely reported to be falling in wells, pits, etc. when they are straying around, of late.
As per the communication of AWBI chairman O P Chaudhary addressed to the DGP (fire and rescue services) with a copy to the director of animal husbandry department and the chief wildlife warden, every year a multitude of animals find themselves trapped in precarious locations such a building ledges, pits, open drainages, wells, overhead wires, trees and other challenging situations. 
“These animals, including cats, dogs, cattle, birds and other wildlife, often suffer and perish due to stress and starvation when not rescued promptly. In many instances, lack of skilled rescue workers and equipment poses a significant challenge to timely rescue efforts,” it said. As per the recommendations of the standing fire advisory committee constituted by the Union home ministry, there is provision of special services for rescuing the animals that are trapped, by the fire and rescue services personnel, free of any charges. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe communication further asked the fire and rescue department personnel to collaborate with local citizens and wildlife department team in rescuing such trapped animals. 
In a latest incident in state, a baby elephant had fallen into a well near Mulamkuzhi in Malayattoor and was rescued by the forests and wildlife department officials after a day-long operation. The forest officials had followed the baby elephant to the forest after rescuing it and found that the whole herd of elephants were lined up in the forest region near the site, waiting for the baby elephant.
The state is already facing the serious issue of wildlife straying to the human inhabitations in search of food and water resulting in a multitude of incidents of human-wildlife conflicts. In several recent cases, either human lives have been lost or grieviously injured and have also caused serious damages to agriculture. 
All the districts of the state that have forest presence, especially Kannur, Wayanad, Kozhikode, Malappuram, Palakkad, Idukki and Pathanamthitta, have been witnessing wild animals like elephants, tigers, leopards, bisons, wild boars and bears straying into the human inhabitations. 
The state is yet to find an effective solution to the issue, despite the repeated untoward incidents.