Nagpur: Coming to the rescue of a man, the Nagpur bench of Bombay high court directed Amravati Crucelian Society to employ him on compassionate grounds holding that its government-aided minority school cannot deny job to persons by adopting gender-bias approach.
The bench also slapped Rs25,000 fine on the society and Holy Cross Convent English High School to be paid to the Legal Services Authority at Amravati district court.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo

“We are sensitive to the fact that the respondent is running a school, mainly for the girls. However, its act of managing the school for girls will not give it privileges to deny employment by adopting gender-bias approach,” a division bench comprising justices Nitin Sambre and Abhay Mantri held.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe bench said just because the Amravati Crucelian Society, a minority institution, is enjoying privileges under Article 30 of the Constitution of India, that by itself will not give it a power to deny public employment on compassionate grounds.
“The grant of compassionate appointment can be said to be a right conferred by the Maharashtra government by virtue of the resolution of December 31, 2002, and other decisions. The stand taken by the society and school that they are not granting such appointment to a male member also can be said to be in violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution. Article 16 provides for equality of opportunity in matter of public employment,” said judges.
Petitioner Rahul Meshram had approached HC after the society and school denied him job on compassionate grounds after the death of his father on August 10, 2012. Both respondents contended that they were a minority institution.
Pointing out that the school had admitted to getting government’s grant, the high court judges said it speaks of the opportunity of employment in an institution which is governed under the government’s supervisory jurisdiction, subject to restrictions/privileges provided under Article 30. They said what is offered by both respondents is a public employment which comes within the domain of Article 16.
“We direct respondents to issue an appointment order to the petitioner for appointing him in Class-IV category within eight weeks and the compliance to that effect be reported to this court. We set up the time-limit having regard to the fact that the respondents conducted themselves in a most discriminatory and arbitrary manner. The appointment order to the petitioner is not issued for about 11 years, but the other person who was junior to him was granted compassionate appointment,” the HC bench said in its judgment.