NAVI MUMBAI: Empowering the disenfranchised is the last critical mile in the process of conducting a free and fair election. In the Mumbai region, more than 100 rescued homeless persons living at a shelter in New Panvel have managed to get voter identity cards, the first such batch of beneficiaries at the 25-year-old institution run by the Social and Evangelical Association for Love (SEAL).Top Picks For You'Power of vote': 125 rescued homeless persons excited to get voter ID cardsTransgender community beats hurdles to have its sayIn all, a total of 125 homeless persons at the shelter have benefited from the initiative undertaken by SEAL's social workers. They are now looking forward to cast their votes in the upcoming Phase-4 of the elections in Maval constituency on May 13.

Videos03:33NDA's Maharashtra Partners Upset With MoS Post In Modi 3.06 days ago03:02Modi 3.0 Cabinet Portfolios Out: Home, Defence, Finance, Foreign Affairs With BJP6 days ago03:41Narendra Modi Takes Oath As India's Prime Minister For Historic Third Consecutive Term7 days ago06:29'Failed To Cross 100...': Modi Mocks 'Loser' INDIA Bloc At Mega NDA Meeting9 days ago04:55'Congress Back To Old Ways': Next Move After Lok Sabha Election Result Decoded | Watch9 days ago04:41UCC, Farm Laws & More: Key Decisions By PM Modi In NDA 3.0 | 'Allies To Dictate Terms'9 days ago03:49'BJP Lost U.P. Due To Non-Performing MPs' Biggest Biggest Poll Debacle | Watch9 days ago03:06Khalistan Protesters In Canada Stun With New Indira Gandhi Assassination Float; India Fumes9 days ago04:28PM Modi Bows To Constitution, Bonds With Naidu & Nitish As TDP, JDU Eye Big Posts In NDA 3.09 days ago09:14Modi's Big 'Stability' Assurance With 'Samarthan'; Calls NDA 'Most Successful Alliance In History'9 days ago123456This electoral addition of 125 names has been quickly noticed by party workers too. They have started visiting the SEAL Ashram to canvass for their candidates and inquire if its inmates have issues that they can resolve. Pastor Biju Samuel, who is second-in-command at SEAL, told TOI: "We are happy that our shelter home is now finally showing on the political radars of parties, since we now have 125 newly registered voters. For the past quarter century, local politicians were hardly interested in homeless people. Now they do."
There is an interesting backstory to how the rescued homeless at SEAL became voters. "During the Covid lockdown period, in the year 2021, we were desperately trying to get vaccinations done for all our inmates. But none of them had any legit ID cards at that time. That is when the then Raigad district collector, Nidhi Choudhari, personally took interest in our problem and issued Aadhaar cards for all of them," said Samuel.

One of the residents at the shelter, Ghanshyam Chavan, 68, happily held out his new ID card for this correspondent, and said: "I used to earlier stay at Lalbaug in central Mumbai, but later I lost my family and also my money. Due to my advancing age, a kind lady brought me to SEAL Ashram. I will surely vote now on polling day."