Patna: At least six people, including three women, were charred to death and 13 others sustained burn injuries after a massive blaze engulfed a popular hotel near Patna Junction in Kotwali police station area of the state capital on Thursday following suspected cylinder blasts.
The fire is believed to have originated in the kitchen on the ground floor of four-storey Pal Hotel due to gas leak in an LPG cylinder, which triggered a series of cylinder explosions around 10.50am.The fire then rapidly spread to the entire building, after which some people jumped through the windows in a bid to save themselves.
It took as many as 51 fire brigade vehicles nearly two hours to douse the flames, after which police and the fire brigade teams rescued 41 people with the help of two hydraulic cranes but couldn’t save the six.
A three-member committee, led by sadar SDO Khandekar Shrikant Kundalik, has been constituted by district magistrate Shirsat Kapil Ashok to probe into the fire incident.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteChandra Prakash, superintendent of police (central), Patna, confirmed deaths of six persons, including an employee of the hotel and a guest, while three are yet to be identified. “At least 13 persons were admitted to Patna Medical College Hospital with burn injuries. The condition of two injured is said to be critical,” he said.
He added they were awaiting the reports of the fire department and civic body, based on which a case would likely be registered by tonight.
Police have so far identified four persons who died in the incident — hotel staff Dinesh Singh (50) from Bhabhua, guest Raj Laxmi, a resident of Purulia district in neighbouring West Bengal, and Rahul Kumar of Bhojpur
According to DSP (Kotwali) Krishna Murari Prasad, Singh was working in the kitchen at the time of the incident, while Raj Lokkhi was staying at the hotel. “We are in the process of identifying the others. Three persons were already dead when the rescue team reached them, while three died during treatment. It appears that most of them died of inhaling smoke,” said the DSP, adding the critically injured suffered over 95% burn injuries.
Among those injured are two minors — Anurag Singh (13) and Gorakh Kumar (16) — apart from Poonam Devi (33), Rohit Kumar (22), Sheikh Dalani (40), Vijay Laxmi (30), Aditya Patel (23), Amlesh Tiwari (40), Jitendra Kumar (47) and Arvind Tiwari (45).
The SP told this newspaper that prima facie it appears that the fire broke out after a cylinder caught fire. “Flames were first reported inside the kitchen and then sound of the explosion of LPG cylinders were heard. When the incident occurred, a police team was already present near the hotel and fire brigade reached with three-four minutes. Many of them came out of the hotel on their own and some of them were rescued by the fire and police department separately,” Prakash said.