NASHIK: Mohit Ahire, barely 12 years old, held his nerve during a close encounter with a leopard, and managed to trap the wildcat inside an office cabin till help arrived in Malegaon on Tuesday morning.
The boy's bravery and presence of mind was the talk of the town. The son of a wedding hall security guard, Ahire said the leopard was just about a foot away when it walked past him and entered the office.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe incident took place at 7am at the Sai Celebration wedding hall along the Malegaon-Nampur Road.
At the time, Ahire was sitting on a bench near the entrance of the wedding hall's booking office and playing on his cellphone. Suddenly, he saw the leopard walking towards him. However, the animal did not seem to notice the petrified boy.
"The leopard was so close. There was hardly any space between the leopard and me. It walked into the inner cabin of the office right in front of me. I was scared, but I quietly managed to get off the bench and sneak out of the office. I closed the door behind me," Ahire told TOI.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More The 12-year-old said a lot of people have been praising him for his courage.
Anil Pawar, the owner of the wedding hall, said, "The dimensions of the booking office is 22ft x 10ft. We have created two compartments in the office. Mohit Ahire was seated in the first compartment near the entrance. The leopard headed straight into the inner cabin without noticing the boy. When the child saw the animal walk past - barely a foot away from him - he stayed calm. He later sneaked out of the office and pulled the door behind him."
Pawar said that earlier in the morning, the leopard had been spotted in the nearby residential area. Residents, along with police and forest personnel, had been trying to locate it. After Ahire told his father that he had trapped a leopard inside the office, the forest and police personnel as well as other citizens came to the site. They pulled down the shutter of the booking office.
Malegaon range forest officer Vaibhav Hiray said, "Our personnel were in the neighbourhood when the boy trapped the leoprad in the wedding hall's office. We immediately called a team from Nashik city. Later, the five-year-old male leopard was tranquilized and rescued."
Hiray said there have been leopard sightings in the past as there are many agricultural fields around the area and even the Mousam river flows just a couple of kilometers from the locality.