NEW DELHI: A teenaged tribal girl from Jharkhand, who had come to Delhi to support her family financially was trapped in vicious exploitation for four years. She was forced to work without pay and was thrashed whenever she requested permission to return home. Her story echoed the grim reality of five other girls rescued from different parts of the city.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
A Jharkhand police team, assisted by Delhi Police, Jharkhand Bhawan and an NGO, rescued the girls. The rescuers claimed that the owner of the placement agency had brought the girls to Delhi in the same manner as the 21 others rescued in the past month.
TimesViewTrafficking of young girls is often part of organised criminal rackets. Such gangs are well networked; their links run deep and wide. It is good that the girls were rescued. But arresting the kingpin and his or her associates is the only way of stopping this heinous trade. And it can only happen when the problem is tackled seriously on the ground
The victims belong to remote villages in Sahibganj in Jharkhand. The 14-year-old girl narrated how she had worked in several houses, performing chores she disliked and which weren't part of the work agreement with the placement agency owner. “Whenever I asked him to send me home,” she recounted, “he'd insist I work another year before I could leave.”
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreAnother 16-year-old girl said, “Rajni (placement agency owner) brought me here. I have been working here for four months and haven’t get a single paisa as salary. When I wept and asked him to send me home, he beat me with a rolling pin.”
One of the rescued girls stated that the behaviour of the placement agency owner was atrocious. He also used a fake Aadhaar card for her. “The agency owner promised me a monthly salary of Rs 12,000 for minimal work. On reaching Delhi, I realised the conditions weren’t what was promised,” said the girl, who was forced to work long hours, both day and night.
A senior Jharkhand Bhawan officer reiterated the allegations that the placement agency owner prepared fake identity cards that made the girls appear of legal age for work. “This was true for most of the girls we rescued. We have asked the cops to investigate this angle too,” the officer said.
A girl working in different Delhi households since 2022 without being paid had a similar grouse. "I told the agency owner I wanted to return home, but he kept extending the date when I could do so," she claimed.
A senior officer disclosed that the girls had been placed in a shelter home. A team will conduct home verifications and, based on their report, the girls will be returned to their villages. Virender Kumar Singh of NGO Mission Mukti Foundation said all the girls, including those who were rescued in the past month, had been placed in households across the city and in Faridabad.
 The placement agency owner charged clients a registration fee of Rs 45,000 and gave the girls salaries ranging between Rs 5,000 and Rs 7,000.