NEW DELHI: A two-month-old boy, reported missing, was rescued by railway police after he was discovered lying on the tracks at Shakur Basti station. After an exhaustive three-day operation, his family was traced to Agra and summoned to Delhi.
According to DCP (Railways) KPS Malhotra, the incident was reported on April 9. A PCR call alerted police about the abandoned infant, following which a team was rushed to the spot.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe child’s mother had boarded her train to return home to Agra, realising later he was missing.
“The child was taken to a private hospital, examined and admitted for a few hours. After his discharge, he was produced before the child welfare committee through a video call and subsequently placed in a crèche facility in Kashmere Gate,” said the officer.
A case was registered under relevant IPC sections and a team comprising inspector Kuldeep and others was formed, the DCP added.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo“The spot where the infant was recovered was thoroughly examined, but there was no CCTV camera that covered it. Crime and forensic teams were also summoned to conduct an inspection for any possible clues about the infant’s origins,” Malhotra said.
The team then followed the standard operating procedure laid down by the department in cases of missing children. “Our priority was to disseminate information far and wide. We shared the child’s details across social media platforms, police networks nationwide, and even uploaded information to ZIP net for maximum visibility,” said another officer.
The authorities scoured the area thoroughly for potential leads, he added. “Every avenue was explored — from analysing entry and exit routes to conducting manual intelligence operations and making inquiries at child centres for any clues regarding the child’s guardians or biological parents,” he said.
The efforts finally bore fruit when an Agra resident — the boy’s father — came forward after spotting his photographs circulating in various groups.
“After verification, the man and his wife were called to Delhi on April 13. On seeing the infant, they confirmed he was their son, Ram Rajavat. After following the due process, the child was handed over to his parents,” DCP Malhotra said.