PUNE: Firemen rescued a software engineer and his four family members trapped in the balcony of his seventh-floor flat on Kondhwa-Bibvewadi Road after a fire broke out around 1.48am on Saturday.
Besides software engineer Mahesh Oswal (41), his mother Ushal Oswal (61), wife Bhakti (41), and his children Ahana (9) and Arav (5) were rescued from the balcony. Furniture and other goods in the techie’s 2BHK apartment in Gangadham Housing Society Phase-2 was gutted.
The flat owner, Mahesh, told TOI, “We suspect that the fire broke in the temple placed in the hall from a burning oil lamp.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe fire spread in the temple and engulfed the wooden furniture, electronic devices and electrical wiring, and destroyed the plaster of Paris in the flat.”
He said, “My flat was gutted in the fire, but my family members and I escaped unhurt. The entire building’s residents, who are like my family members, helped us in dousing the fire, made attempts to open the door and alerted the fire brigade.”
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreFire officer Kailash Shinde from the Kondhwa sub-fire station said, “We received calls from the building’s residents stating that thick black fumes were emanating from a flat. The residents poured buckets of water on the flat’s door but failed to gain control over the fire. After we reached the spot, firemen went to the top floor and broke open the door. We first rescued five members of the family from the balcony and ensured that the LPG domestic gas cylinder was stored safely in the balcony. We later found that the hose pipe was not operational in the building.”
Shinde said the firemen sprayed water and gained control over the fire in 30 minutes and took another 30 minutes to douse the flames. The fire gutted wooden furniture and electrical appliances in the kitchen and hall. Timely action taken by the firemen prevented the fire from spreading to other rooms. Six fire tenders and a water tanker were used in the fire-fighting operation.
“The Oswal family was in a state of shock after we rescued them. They could not react to the situation. We consoled them, offered them water, made them sit comfortably in a neighbour’s flat and completed the fire-fighting operation. Mahesh Oswal told firemen that the fire broke in the temple placed in the hall. It rapidly spread to other goods and gutted them in fire,” he added.
Mahesh said the issue of the absence of fire safety measures in the building was discussed with the society’s chairman. The system would be made operational at the earliest.