NAVI MUMBAI: The New Panvel based NGO, Social and Evangelical Association for Love (SEAL), and the Navi Mumbai police force have joined hands to undertake a vital humanitarian work before the start of the monsoon season – that is to rescue over 150 homeless and desperate people from the streets.
Under the tagline #BeforeTheRains, the noble mission was flagged off on Wednesday jointly by the assistant commissioner of police (Panvel division) Ashok Rajput and the founder of SEAL Ashram, Pastor K M Philip, at their shelter home where over 250 rescued persons have been housed.Four large sized ambulances were pressed into service in this regard.
The Navi Mumbai Commissioner of Police Milind Bharambe has agreed to help out the NGO to rescue the homeless.
Talking to mediapersons at the event, ACP Rajput, said: ``The police personnel often come across homeless persons in terrible conditions during the monsoon time. Hence, it is good that SEAL has contacted Navi Mumbai police in order to rescue a maximum number of homeless cases. We will offer all the legal support in this regard.''
The SEAL founder, Philip, added: "During the rains, the homeless persons, especially the mentally unstable suffer from multiple diseases, and even have maggots crawling out of their open wounds. It is ghastly that many often die on the streets as `unknown'. Hence, we try to rescue them.''
The chief patron of SEAL, Dr Abraham Mathai, who is the former vice chairperson of the state's minority commission, commented: ``SEAL, which was established in 1999 in Panvel taluka, has been tirelessly working to help the helpless and the homeless. It is good that this year the police had officially decided to collaborate in this work, beginning May 22. Hats off to Pastor Philip and his team for also succeeding in the in getting Aadhaar Cards made for many inmates at the shelter home, which helped in reuniting them with their families since Covid period.''
Philip added that they have earlier launched the Rescunite Mission (rescue and reunite) in order to help the homeless persons go back to their homes after they went missing – often due to schizophrenia and other mental ailments.