KOLKATA:A 63-year-old ailing woman, living alone at her two-storied home in Salt Lake, was rescued by Bidhannagar cops on Friday after she had slipped and passed out at her home on Thursday evening.
A domestic help, who had come to work on Friday morning, was the first to raise an alarm when the woman —Monika Dasgupta—didn’t open the door despite repeated knocks and didn’t answer phone calls.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoLater, the neighbours called the cops, who climbed onto the cornice and opened a first-floor window to spot the woman lying on the floor. The cops broke open a back door and rescued her.

Dasgupta had suffered injuries on her head and knees. She was taken to a private hospital by the officers of Bidhannagar (East) police station, where a doctor advised her bed rest. She has been asked to be kept under observation on Friday.
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoCops have passed on their phone numbers to her and as ked her maid to stay with her in absence of any near relatives in the city. Her husband had died several years ago and she is childless, an officer said.
“As the cops peeped through a window, they could see the woman lying on the floor and responding to calls from outside by moving her hands but was too weak to get up by herself or shout,” said a senior officer of Bidhannagar Commissionerate.
The woman told cops she had gone to the toilet on Thursday night and while returning back to her bedroom she somehow slipped and fell on the passage between the bedroom and drawing room.
“She seems to have passed out following the fall. She cant remember for how long she had remained unconscious but when she got back to her sense on Friday morning, she says she couldn’t get up on her own even though she could hear people calling her name and pressing the door bell ,” said the officer.
“Since she lived alone, we didn’t want to take a chance and feared something bad may have happened to her and called police. The cops were quick to respond,” said a neighbour.
Cops lauded the timely intervention of the domestic help and the neighbours in the township, which is often criticised for not taking enough care of the residents living in adjacent houses or flats. “Thanks to the timely intervention of the locals, we could rescue the old lady . We have also informed her family members and are also trying to get her enrolled with our Sanjhbati community policing programme for elderlies living alone so that we can keep a regular monitoring on her,” said the officer.