Bengaluru: Animal keepers at the zoo and rescue centre in Bannerghatta are having a hard time, helping animals manage the heatwave.
Even though the recent spell of summer rain has brought some respite, the record high temperatures over the past three months have left hundreds of animals under severe heat stress posing a threat to their lives. 

With sprinklers and water bath facilities failing to help animals beat the summer heat, staffers of the zoo and rescue centre have adopted dietary changes. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoOfficials at the zoo and rescue centre considerably cut down on the daily intake of meat for animals and replaced it with carb-rich porridge, tender coconuts, ORS drinks, bloodsicles, probiotic curds, milk and frozen fruit bowls for over a month. While the zoo is part of Bannerghatta Biological Park, the rescue centre is run by Wildlife SOS.
They planned a detailed diet chart for every species. “All primates were provided with fresh tender coconuts twice a day besides mixing water-rich fruits and vegetables like watermelon, muskmelon and cucumber,” said Surya Sen, executive director of Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP). 
Similarly, the carnivores were fed with with small quantities of meat. Bloodsicles made of frozen animal blood and vitamin supplements and mixed with ORS powder help animals cool off constantly by licking on it, according to a veterinary officer. 
“Unlike the human body which regulates body temperature (thermoregulation) by sweating profusely, animals do not sweat to such an extent. Their body temperature can vary, affecting their health. In the wild, animals naturally cool off by wading through water holes or by rubbing against a moist surface. Some animals even pant to push out hot air from the inside and then absorb cool air,” explained Dr Rajat Kulkarni, veterinarian at Wildlife SoS.
 “Due to the scorching sun, carnivores do not venture out and remain idle all day. Due to lack of activity and poor metabolism, they find it difficult to digest the meat. However, carb-rich food including porridge is easy to digest and keeps the animal hydrated,” Dr Kulkarni added. Porridge is normally prepared with cereals, millets and lentils and pearl millets, which was avoided due to heat-inducing properties. Further, sloth bears were fed with probiotic curds and milk along with porridge to keep them hydrated. 
Apart from dietary changes, a mud wallow facility was created in each enclosure, housing herbivores. Attendants took up terrace gardening atop shelters so that the heat was absorbed and the enclosures remained cool. Some shelters were even provided with air coolers. “The stone walls of the dens were kept wet throughout the day with damp clothes,” said an animal keeper at BBP.