THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: Opposition leader V D Satheesan has sought intervention of external affairs minister (EAM) S Jaishankar in repatriation of three Kerala youths, who were forced to fight for the Russian Army in Ukraine and initiate a probe against the recruitment agencies involved in illegal trafficking.
He said it is disturbing to learn that the youths from the state are among those stranded in war-torn Ukraine after being lured with the promise of a lucrative employment in Russia, only to be forced to engage in the continuing conflict.
He said, according to their relatives, they were taken to Russia by a recruitment agency with the promise of a salary of Rs 2.5 lakh. But when they arrived, their passports and mobile phones were confiscated, and they were forced to fight for Russia against Ukraine. 
It is learned that some of them are injured, and their families back home have raised serious apprehension on the safety of the youths stranded in Ukraine, he said. 
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo"I believe that this is part of a trafficking network that entices young men to work in Russia and send them to war.
I urge your good self to make every effort to bring back all of those who are stuck in the combat zone and to initiate a comprehensive investigation against the recruitment agencies that form part of a large illegal trafficking network," he urged. 
Chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan had written to the EAM on the same issue. 
Union minister of state for external affairs V Muraleedharan had visited the houses of the youths in Anchuthengu and had given assurances to their families that the Centre would do everything possible to rescue them and bring them back safely.
Other than the three youths, the case of David, a Poovar native, has also emerged. He was lured with a job offer and finally ended up fighting for the Russian army. He is currently in a refugee camp after being injured in the war, according to his relatives.