KOLKATA: Fifty-seven hours after a five-storey illegal building in Garden Reach came crashing down on a neighbouring slum burying scores, disaster management agencies engaged in search and rescue called off the operation on Wednesday evening. Since early Monday, they had raced against time to pull out 17 persons alive and recovered 10 bodies. 
At least one local resident and two labourers who are missing are presumed to be buried under tonnes of concrete and steel that the rescue personnel had been trying to cut through.But they signalled the end of operation after it became apparent that they couldn't dig any further and heavy machinery was required to lift five concrete slabs and multiple pillars and beams that had caved in when the building imploded late on Sunday night.
"We have tried our best over the last three days and dug all the way till the ground floor but haven't been able to locate any more bodies. The locals claim at least one resident of the area is still missing. We haven't been able to find any trace of life. So, we have handed over the task of demolishing and removing the rubble to Kolkata Municipal Corporation. If there are any more bodies buried below, KMC will be able to extract them after clearing the debris," said a senior officer of National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) who was leading the search operation at the site.
"We were told the missing person could be buried somewhere under the staircase. We made multiple holes on the concrete slabs above the stairs, inserted a victim locating camera (VLC) and used a life detecting device (LDD) but couldn't spot anyone," another DMG official said. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo As the agencies packed their equipment and began leaving ground zero, the neighbourhood became agitated as Sheru Nizami, one of the promoters of the collapsed building, was still believed to be buried under the debris. His family members were peeved that the search and rescue operation was abandoned and demanded that the body be retrieved with dignity.
"How can they stop rescue operations like this? I know my brother may not be alive but his body is trapped under the debris. We have urged KMC to remove the debris with care so that my brother's body can be retrieved with full dignity," said Nizami's cousin Shamim Akhtar.
Nizami, father to four girls and a boy, used to work as a supervisor at a local factory and had many local youths working under him. He used to visit the under-construction building every night and stayed there late, chatting with friends who would gather there. Sunday night was no different.
After the building collapse, some local residents had even called Nizami on his cellphone and he had apparently answered and told them he was trapped under the debris with some others and had urged them to save him. "But the phone got switched off after some time," a cousin of Nizami had told TOI.
Following the exit of the search and rescue agencies, the KMC officials have set up a fresh set of halogen lamps and deployed heavy machinery and mini trucks to take out the debris from the area.
"We will maintain utmost caution in the removal of debris so that if there is any body buried under the rubble, it can be retrieved in proper shape. Our executive engineers are at work and they will stay there overnight to oversee the debris removal and the necessary demolition process," said a KMC official.