300 words
Panaji: Six tourists were rescued off Goa’s beaches over the long weekend, including a person who was about to take his own life. Drishti Marine lifesavers also reunited a lost child with the parents and administered first aid to two injured persons.
A patrolling supervisor, Shankar Paryekar, helped counsel and talk a 32-year-old man from taking his own life.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe Mysore resident was seen in visible distress. Paryekar spoke to the tourist and soothed him. After guiding the tourist to the nearby watch tower, Paryekar informed the police and waited with the victim until their arrival.
At Agonda, a 32-year-old Mumbai resident was rescued by lifesaver Satyawan Velip after nearly drowning in a rip current along a rocky section. The victim was brought safely to shore with a rescue tube and a jet ski.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoAt Benaulim, a 47-year-old woman from Kolkata was rescued by lifesaver Guitesh Gaonkar, who noticed the victim was caught in a flash rip current and was struggling to resurface.
Lifeguards also rushed to rescue kayakers who were at risk of drowning at Palolem and Cola. While a 24-year-old resident of Hyderabad had to be rescued around 700 metres off the coastline at Palolem after his kayak sprung a leak, two Bengaluru tourists had to be rescued from Cola River after their kayak overturned. Vigilant lifeguards rushed to their rescue and helped bring them back ashore.
Drishti also reported that a 19-year-old man from Bengaluru suffered a deep cut while swimming on Baina beach because of broken glass.
A three-year-old at Colva beach was reunited with his parents, residents of Margao, who were occupied swimming. The distressed child was noticed wandering along the beach by a lifesaver, who promptly made announcements from the jeep. Once the parents were located and their identities confirmed, the child was handed over to them.