NEW DELHI: Police are mulling a DNA test on the 14-day-old girl rescued from a baby-selling racket in Begumpur last month and the woman from Punjab who claims to be her mother. They hope to determine their biological relationship, if any.
Sources said during investigation, the cops discovered that the baby, rescued from the northwest Delhi locality on Feb 20, was trafficked from Abohar in Punjab.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo“The people accused of the crime had given information about a woman who they claimed had sold the baby to them for Rs 50,000. We reached the woman's house and found that she was ill. She admitted that it was her baby but that she hadn’t taken any money from the suspects,” the source said.
Police stated they will move court for permission to conduct a DNA test on the child and the woman to determine their biological relationship. "Once the woman is fit, the cops will plan their action,” the source added. Investigations have also revealed the sale of another child from Punjab just days before this baby's rescue.
After the rescue, police had arrested a woman and her daughter, following this up with the arrest of six additional individuals from Delhi and Punjab. During questioning, the suspects said they had sold the child to Sangram, who is believed to be one of the ringleaders of the trafficking ring. “Raids are being conducted within the city and in other states,” an officer said. The gang allegedly sold new-born babies for Rs 12-15 lakh in Delhi after buying them from poor families in Punjab for about Rs 50,000.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoPolice have identified two people as the masterminds of the racket and are in their pursuit in Odisha and Delhi. “One of the accused is Sangram and the other is from Punjab. They are the ones who know about the people to whom they sold the children,” an officer revealed.
Five individuals from Punjab, including a midwife who impersonated a doctor and operated a clinic, were arrested. According to police, the midwife stated that she and other gang members had the responsibility of identifying financially struggling families with several children in villages. The others then targeted such families.
The gang had certain criteria for the babies they bought and sold, including skin colour, gender and health, police added. The investigators are also probing the role of hospital staff who might have divulged patient information to the gang.