Nagpur: A year after a minor from Chandrapur was forced into prostitution in the garb of beautician training may finally get justice with Sitabuldi police set to file a chargesheet against the accused, Varsha Ramteke alias Anjali, and her accomplice. She was rescued from a sex den in Abhyankar Nagar in June last year. The survivor, who came from an underprivileged background had shifted to Nagpur to work in the salon to financially support her parents.
The role of Sitabuldi police came under scanner after Ramteke managed to avoid arrest for seven months, before being taken into custody a fortnight ago, following rejection of her pre-arrest bail.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe case against Ramteke and her accomplice was filed in July last year, following a complaint by the survivor’s mother.

Sitabuldi inspector Rakhi Gedam, who’s the investigation officer in the case, stated her chargesheet was ready and would be filed in the next few days. “The minor’s statement before the magistrate is part of the chargesheet. Police have damning evidence against the accused. In the next couple of days, the chargesheet would be sent to court,” said Gedam.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoIn January last year, the survivor and her friend shifted to Nagpur and were lured into flesh trade by Ramteke. She was first taken to an apartment near Traffic Park, within Sitabuldi police limits, before being compelled to sleep with clients.
The survivor was rescued by Bajaj Nagar police from a flesh trade salon at Abyankar Nagar that wore the façade of a beauty parlour. Her mother, a farm labourer from Chandrapur, was informed about her daughter’s plight by police, who shifted her to a govt shelter.
The survivor’s mother registered an offence against Ramteke at Sitabuldi police station in July last year. While sources said, Ramteke had walked into Sitabuldi police station with her lawyer to surrender, police maintained that she was compelled to walk into the trap before being taken into custody.