NEW DELHI: Five people have died and 33 have been injured in a tornado that struck Guangzhou, in southern China, reported CNN, citing Chinese media sources.
Guangzhou is a city in southern China with a population of 19 million. It has been experiencing tornadoes at level-three intensity, which is two levels below the highest level of five.
The authorities reported that 141 factory buildings were damaged, but no residential houses collapsed.
A weather station in Liangtian Village, Baiyun District, about 1.7 miles from where the tornado hit, registered a maximum wind gust of 20.6 metres per second, according to CNN, citing Xinhua.
Search and rescue operations had ended by 10 pm local time.
The tornado was followed by heavy rains in southern China. The rains unleashed deadly floods and posed a threat to the lives of millions of people. Rescuers are rushing to evacuate residents trapped by rising waters.
Guangdong province, which is an economic powerhouse with a population of 127 million, has experienced extensive flooding. This has led to the relocation of over 110,000 people, as reported by state media citing the local government.
Earlier this week, the state media stated that floods had resulted in the deaths of at least four individuals in Guangdong.
Since April 16, continuous heavy rains have hit the Pearl River Delta, which is China's manufacturing hub and one of the most densely populated regions in the country. Four weather stations in Guangdong have recorded the highest rainfall for April.
The Pearl River basin experiences yearly flooding from April to September. However, the area has encountered increasingly severe rainstorms and floods in recent times. Scientists caution that the climate crisis will enhance extreme weather, leading to more frequent and deadly events.
Tornadoes are not as common in China as they are in the US, but they still occur.
A scientific article published in 2015 revealed that China experiences less than 100 tornadoes annually, with a recorded death toll of at least 1,772 individuals due to tornadoes in the country over the 50-year period since 1961.
China Meteorological Agency has issued a warning regarding heavy rain and strong storms that are expected to persist until the end of the month, as reported by CNN.