NEW DELHI: At least eight died, and over 20 people sustained injuries after the Sealdah-bound 13174 Kanchanjunga Express collided with a goods train on Monday morning near New Jalpaiguri.
The incident occurred around 9 am near Rangapani, close to the New Jalpaiguri station. The Kanchanjunga Express was en route from Agartala to Sealdah when the accident took place.

The collision resulted in the derailment of at least two rear compartments of the Kanchanjunga Express. The locomotive of the goods train struck the express train from behind, causing significant damage and derailment of the compartments.
The divisional railway manager (DRM) of NFR's Katihar division said the impact of the collision led to the derailment of the train's rear compartments near Rangapani station, approximately seven kilometers from New Jalpaiguri station.
According to a railway source, the automatic signalling system between Ranipatra Railway Station and Chattar Hat Junction in West Bengal, where a goods train collided with the Sealdah Kanchanjungha Express from behind, had been defective since 5.50am.
"Train No. 13174 (Sealdah Kanchanjungha Express) departed Rangapani station at 8:27 a.m. and stopped between Ranipatra railway station and Chattar Hat due to the automatic signalling failure," the source told PTI.
Another railway official explained that when the automatic signalling system fails, the station master issues a written authority called TA 912, which allows the driver to cross all red signals in the section due to the defect.
"The station master of Ranipatra had issued TA 912 to Train No. 13174 (Sealdah Kanchanjungha Express)," the source said.
He added, "Around the same time, a goods train, GFCJ, departed Rangapani at 8:42 a.m. and hit Train No. 13174 in the rear, resulting in the derailment of the guard's coach, two parcel coaches, and a general seating coach."

The rescue teams are adopting the manual process of bringing the affected compartments back into position to locate more trapped passengers.
“We are avoiding the use of gas cutters right now as we fear that more people might be trapped inside the affected compartments. Use of gas cutters might endanger their lives. Since we are still adopting the manual process, the rescue process is slow. Rainfall is adding further difficulty,” said an official of the state Disaster Management Department, present at the spot.
To assist stranded passengers, Partha Pratim Roy, chairman of the North Bengal State Transport Corporation (NBSTC), said that "10 buses of North Bengal Rashtriya Paribahan Nigam have left for the accident site to rescue stranded passengers of the Sealdah-bound Kanchanjunga Express. Also, additional bus services from Siliguri to Kolkata from Siliguri Tenzing Norgay bus terminus will be operational from this afternoon."
Prime Minister Narendra Modi condoled the loss of lives in the train accident near New Jalpaiguri in West Bengal. In a post on X, the prime minister said the "railway accident in West Bengal is saddening. Condolences to those who lost their loved ones".
"I pray that the injured recover at the earliest. Spoke to officials and took stock of the situation. Rescue operations are underway to assist the affected. The Railways Minister Shri @AshwiniVaishnaw Ji is on the way to the site of the mishap as well," he added. 

West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee expressed her shock and concern over the incident. In a post on X, she said, “Shocked to learn, just now, about a tragic train accident, in Phansidewa area of Darjeeling district. While details are awaited, Kanchenjunga Express has reportedly been hit by a goods train..”
She further said, "DM, SP, doctors, ambulances and disaster teams have been rushed to the site for rescue," she said.

Union rail minister Ashwini Vaishnaw also commented on the incident, saying, "Unfortunate accident in NFR zone. Rescue operations going on at war footing. Railways, NDRF, and SDRF are working in close coordination. Injured are being shifted to the hospital. Senior officials have reached the site."

Authorities have initiated rescue operations, and disaster response teams, including the NDRF and a divisional team with 15 ambulances, are providing medical assistance and support to the affected passengers. 
Ministers are also coordinating efforts from the war room. Meanwhile, help desks have been set up to assist concerned individuals. The contact numbers are as follows:
Sealdah help desk:
033-23508794
033-23833326
Guwahati station helpline:
0361-2731621
0361-2731622
0361-2731623
Meanwhile, Congress President Mallikarjun Kharge criticized the Modi government for what he termed as "utter mismanagement" of the railway ministry following the tragic train collision. "Extremely distressed by the Kanchanjunga Express train collision accident in Jalpaiguri, West Bengal, where many people have lost their lives and several have been injured," he said.
"The scenes of the accident are painful. Our heart goes out to the families of the victims. In this hour of grief, we express our solidarity and condolences to each one of them. We wish a speedy recovery to the injured. Immediate and full compensation must be provided to the victims," he demanded.
Kharge alleged that in the past 10 years, the Modi government has indulged in "utter mismanagement" of the Railway Ministry.
"As a responsible Opposition, it is our bounden duty to underline how the Modi Government has systematically converted the Rail Ministry into a platform of 'Camera-driven' self-promotion," the Congress chief claimed.
"Today's tragedy is yet another reminder of this stark reality," he alleged.
"Make no mistake, we will remain persistent with our questions and shall make the Modi Government accountable for its criminal abandonment of the Indian Railways," Kharge said.