RAIPUR: Durg police and Railway Police Force on Sunday have rescued 12 children aged 8 and 16 years, sitting on railway station platform unattended on March 28. Few children are from Chhattisgarh and from other states. They were handed over to child welfare committee (CWC) for further process.
Speaking to TOI, Durg SP Jitendra Shukla said that the children were under the monitoring of ChildLine and CWC and are being sent back to their families.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
As part of the drive to combat human trafficking and track missing children, Railway Police Force and Durg crime intelligence branch officer Hemlata Bhaskar were carrying out patrolling on trains, railway station and its premises, Sanjeev Kumar Sinha from RPF told TOI.
He said that 12 children, mostly eight and ten years of age, were found from platform number four, waiting to catch a train.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More“Upon inquiring, they said that they were coming from Hyderabad and had alighted from Secunderabad-Raipur Express train and were waiting to catch another train to Ambikapur. These children said they were students of a Gurukul in Hyderabad and they were going to attend a yoga competition to Ambikapur. They had no guardian with them and we had to immediately rescue them to ChildLine, and the matter was reported to CWC,” RPF officer said.
Denying it a case of human trafficking, Sinha said that the families of children were informed and they were coming to pick them, and the procedure of handing over the kids would be followed as per the norms of Juvenile Justice Act.
With support from Bachpan Bachao Aandolan, RPF and crime branch have made accommodation and meals arrangement for the children till they are taken back home.
Of the twelve, two kids are from Nagaland, one from Assam, three from Jharkhand and others from Raigarh, Baloda Bazar, Jashpur and Janjgir Champa districts of Chhattisgarh.