New Delhi: Panic struck Karol Bagh market when a major fire was reported at a garment showroom on Monday. Three people who got trapped were rescued using a ladder. A fire official said it took almost three hours to control the blaze, but nobody was injured.
Police were informed about the fire in the market on Ajmal Khan Road in central Delhiat 5.28pm, and 15 fire tenders with nearly 100 firefighters were immediately sent to the spot.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe nearby showrooms and shops were vacated amid achaotic situation. 
A team from the local police station rushed to the spot. Deputy commissioner of police (central) M Harsha Vardhan said they found three people stuck on the top floor. “They were taken out of the building with the help of public using a ladder,” he said. Police said they would investigate the reason behind the fire.
A video showed heavy flames and thick black smoke billowing out of the building. A large crowd had gathered near the spot. Another video, shot after the blaze was doused, showed that everything in the showroom was gutted. Firefighters were seen searching the affected building.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreThe incident took place when the market was crowded in the late afternoon. A senior fire official said they had to use the Bronto skylift system to reach the affected building and douse the blaze. “Highly combustible materials, mostly clothes, were inside the showroom, which posed a major challenge to us. They acted as a catalyst and the fire spread to other parts of the building,” the official added. 
Man charred to death
A 45-year-old man was charred to death in a garment showroom after it caught fire in northeast Delhi’s Durga Puri Extension on Monday. The deceased, an employee of the showroom, was identified as Jitender, also known as Chotu. 
Police were informed at 6.01am on Monday about the fire in the ground-floor showroom. “In the morning, when the fire broke out, all residents came out of the building safely, except for Jitender who got trapped in the fire,” the officer said. 
The building has a godown on the first floor while the second and third floors have living quarters. At least 20 fire tenders were sent to douse the fire. 
According to police, the charred body was found on the first floor during the search after the fire was doused. A case under Section 285 (negligent conduct with respect to fire or combustible matter) and 304A (causing death by negligence) of IPC has been registered against the owners of the building.
“The four-floor property is built on a plot of 150 yards and is owned by Padam Singh and his brother Sanjay”, said deputy commissioner of police (northeast) Joy Tirkey.