GUWAHATI: An Army junior commissioned officer (JCO) was kidnapped by a group of armed men from Thoubal district of strife-torn Manipur on Friday and was later rescued after a day-long search and rescue operation by the Army and security agencies from a remote location in Kakching district. 
A defence PRO said the serving JCO, Naib Subedar Konsam Kheda Singh, a resident of Charangpat Mamang Leikai in district Thoubal of Manipur, was on leave.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoHe was kidnapped from his residence in a vehicle at 9 am on Friday.
“Army columns launched a coordinated joint search operation by security agencies to rescue the JCO. The synergized efforts of the security forces resulted in the JCO being safely rescued at 6:30 PM. The JCO is currently at Waikhong Police Station (near Kakching) in Thoubal district. Manipur Police is investigating the incident,” the PRO said. 
This is the fourth incident of soldiers being kidnapped while on leave or on duty. Family members of soldiers have also been targeted. In September last year, a soldier, Serto Thangthang Kom, was abducted and killed by an unidentified armed group. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoIn November last year, an unidentified armed group kidnapped four people while they were travelling in an SUV from the hill district Churachandpur and killed them. They were family members of an Army soldier who is serving in Jammu and Kashmir. His father, who was also travelling in the same vehicle, was dumped by the miscreants on the roadside in a critically injured state. He was later airlifted by army to Dimapur for treatment. 
Last month, an additional superintendent of police in Manipur was kidnapped from near his house in Imphal by a Meitei radical group, Arambai Tenggol. He was rescued by the police in a swift operation. In another incident, two labourers engaged in construction work at Moreh were beaten up by some unidentified miscreants on Thursday afternoon.