The Ahmedabad fire tragedy of 1867, as Kavi Dalpatram wrote in an article, posed several challenges for firemen. it took the Nagarsheths to mobilize resources and get people to join in the rescue efforts
The recent Rajkot gaming zone fire which the Gujarat high court took suo motu cognizance of has left the administration with no choice but to pull up its socks and enforce fire safety measures.This renewed focus on fire safety — an exercise undertaken with clockwork precision only after a disaster — comes as a grim reminder of a similar tragedy in Gujarat from over 150 years ago. It was the first recorded fire tragedy in Gujarat’s municipal history — the 1867 fire of Patasha ni Pol.
On a fateful Shivaratri night on March 4, 1867, just three years after the establishment of a fire department in Ahmedabad, a blaze ravaged a series of residential buildings at Patashani Pol, a neighbourhood (off Gandhi Road today), killing two, and became a turning point in how cities dealt with fire safety.
An article noted the initial lack of willingness by the neighbourhoods to help the authorities. The fire, as recorded in “Bamba Na Upyog Vishey” by Gujarati poet Kavi Dalpatram in the magazine “Buddhi Prakash”, started in a firewood storeroom.
Dalpatram, drawing on eyewitness accounts, suggested two possibilities that caused the fire: Either a lamp spark ignited dried grass in the room, or the lamp fell, spilling fuel and igniting the flammable materials. Regardless of the cause, the fire quickly engulfed the storeroom, and spread to four neighbouring three-storey houses, reducing them to cinder.
“In the article, Dalpatram describes the initial chaos. The faujdar, the local police chief, arrived first, clad in his nightclothes, along with a few firefighters,” says Rizwan Kadri, a historian from Ahmedabad and member of the Prime Minister’s Museum and Library.
Kadri retrieved Dalpatram’s article from the Maharashtra state archives last year. With three buildings ablaze, residents scrambled for safety, leaving two inhabitants trapped inside. Soon after, prominent businessmen Nagarsheth Premabhai and Sheth Umabhai reached the spot, followed by the municipal secretary and British officers. They witnessed a sight they could have never imagined. As the fire raged on, residents from the neighbouring pols gathered and stood as mere spectators, engaged in an animated discussion about the fire’s spread instead of offering help.
“The citizens who gathered at the spot were busy speculating which would be the next building to catch fire and the state of people trapped inside. It was shocking and simply unthinkable. Is this the way we react to disasters as citizens?” Dalpatram wrote in the article. This lack of cooperation extended to the firefighters’ pleas for water from wells within homes.
“The neighbours, hesitant or unwilling, refused to help. They even refused to allow officers to collect water in pitchers to be taken to the site,” says Kadri.
Dalpatram writes that faced with this unexpected obstacle amid a grave situation, police officials resorted to emergency measures. They entered homes forcibly to access wells and water pitchers. As reinforcements arrived, including the city’s newly formed fire brigade, the situation began to turn. The firemen, equipped with water cannons, tackled the blaze and prevented its further spread.
Premabhai and Umabhai played an important role in mobilizing the community. They appealed for help and explained how the fire could engulf the neighbouring pols too. This prompted the residents to finally offer help, Dalpatram writes. People from the neighbouring areas brought water pitchers and the ‘bishtis’, the local water bearers, arrived with animal-skin bags (goat or buffalo) filled with water from the Sabarmati. The firefighting operations stretched for nearly a day. While extinguishing the inferno, firefighters also sprayed water on the surrounding structures to prevent further damage.
Dalpatram also suggested valuable lessons learned from the incident. He emphasized the need for readily available water sources for firefighting, proposing public wells in the pols and other areas. He also acknowledged concerns raised by citizens in Saurashtra, who feared that public wells in residential areas could become suicide spots. “This was because even small domestic quarrels will lead to incidents of women jumping into the wells,” Dalpatram wrote. He advocated placing the wells away from residential areas.