NEW DELHI: Indian Navy on Saturday said that it brought 35 Somali pirates to Mumbai aboard the warship INS Kolkata, days after they were captured by the Indian forces, who freed a hijacked bulk carrier and rescued several hostages.
The rescue saw marine commandos being para-dropped from a C-17 aircraft and exchanges of gunfire to rescue the hijacked merchant vessel MV Ruen and its 17-member crew in the major operation on the high seas.

The pirates, who had commandeered MV Ruen for use as a "mother pirate ship" to launch attacks on other commercial ships in the region, even shot down a small spotter drone flown from destroyer INS Kolkata during the operation.
High-stakes showdown: Indian Navy confronts Somali pirates in dramatic gun battle on Ex-MV Ruen
"There is now also the Maritime Anti-Piracy Act, which was notified last year, to prosecute such cases. The usual practice is to set apprehended pirates adrift on their skiffs after disarming them to ensure they do not pose a threat to other vessels. But these 35 pirates opened fire on our warship. If they are let go, they will re-group and begin their piracy attacks again," an officer had told TOI.
"In a reckless hostile act, the pirates shot down the ship-launched drone and fired at INS Kolkata. In a calibrated response as per international laws, INS Kolkata disabled the vessel's steering system and navigational aids, forcing her to stop," Navy spokesperson Commander Vivek Madhwal had said.
Bulgaria FM thanks Indian Navy for rescuing crew from hijacked ship MV Ruen
The C-17 aircraft, flying for almost 10 hours from the Indian mainland, also executed "a precision airborne drop" of the marine commandos and two combat rubberised raiding craft boats to augment the operation.
"INS Kolkata undertook precisely measured actions, while maintaining her position close to the vessel. She also engaged in forceful negotiations that led to the pirates’ surrender due to the sustained pressure," he said.
Chief of Naval Staff Admiral R Hari Kumar, speaking on the 100 days of the Indian Navy’s operations for anti-drone, anti-missile and anti-piracy attacks in the Gulf of Aden, Arabian Sea and Red Sea, said "In the last ten years, this is the first time that pirates in such large numbers of pirates have been caught. They used the big hijacked ships as mother ships and they were moving around. This is what we have been trying to stop".
"None of our Indian vessels have been targeted. The Houthis have been targeting vessels with linkages to Israel. They are also targeting ships with flags of Western countries like the UK and the US. We are getting involved because we have Indian crew on almost all these ships," Navy chief said. 
He said that piracy has resurfaced as an industry to gain from the disorder in the region, adding that Indian Navy will take affirmative action to prevent it.
(With agencies input)