JAIPUR: At least 15 employees, including vigilance officers and workers, of the Hindustan Copper Ltd (HCL), a public sector company, were trapped underground at 1,875ft in a mine at Kolihan near Khetri in Neem Ka Thana district late Tuesday night. They were participating in an inspection when the chain of the lift taking them below dropped.
One employee, identified as Upendra Pandey, has succumbed to his injuries.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoFourteen others were rescued, and four are currently receiving treatment in Jaipur. Upendra Pandey, the Chief Vigilance Officer of HCL, had arrived for an inspection on Tuesday.
 The deputy general manager and in-charge of Kolihan Mines is in critical condition, while the other two have sustained fractures.
It is expected that within the next hour, the rest of the individuals will also be successfully bailed out, according to official sources.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteDrive Finance ForwardCFA InstituteUndoNearly 18 ambulances and 20 doctors have gone to the spot along with police teams for the rescue op.
Fifteen officers got trapped when the lift chain broke around 7:45 p.m. on Tuesday. They had all gone underground to a depth of 1850 feet for an inspection when the accident took place.
Accident took place at Kolihan mine 
Till the time of receiving the last information, authorities said they were repairing the lift and taking other measures to rescue them.
According to police, the accident took place at Kolihan mine of HCL in Neem Ka Thana district. 
"Some vigilance officials and other departments had come for inspection. As they went underground to see the work, the lift malfunctioned. All of them are at a depth of 1,875ft," Zulfikar Ali, deputy superintendent of police, Khetri told TOI. "They are safe and the officials of the company with a team of doctors are working to rescue them. We are planning to take them up by repairing the lift," Ali, who is at the spot, said.
"As soon as they come out, we will give them oxygen and take them to hospitals. The HCL hospital and nearby ones have been kept on alert mode," said a senior Neem Ka Thana police officer.
In a parallel lift, a rescue team comprising doctors and nursing staff have been sent underground.