NEW DELHI: Over 40 Indians were killed and more than 50 others injured after a devastating fire broke out at dawn in a building housing around 195 migrant workers in southern Kuwait's Mangaf area, officials said on Wednesday.
The total number of fatalities in the Al-Mangaf building reached 49, with 42 of the victims being Indian nationals. The remaining casualties included Pakistani, Filipino, Egyptian, and Nepali nationals.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi described the fire incident as "saddening" and held a meeting with external affairs minister S Jaishankar, NSA Ajit Doval, Foreign Secretary Vinay Kwatra, and Principal Secretary to the PM PK Mishra to review the situation.

    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo
An official statement noted that PM Modi expressed deep sorrow over the "unfortunate incident" and extended condolences to the families of the deceased. He announced an ex-gratia relief of Rs 2 lakh to each of the families of the deceased Indian nationals from the Prime Minister's Relief Fund.
Minister of state for external affairs Kirti Vardhan Singh is urgently traveling to Kuwait following the prime minister's direction to oversee assistance to the injured Indians and to ensure the early repatriation of the mortal remains of those killed.

The official statement mentioned that PM Modi wished a speedy recovery to those injured and directed the government to extend all possible assistance.
"The fire mishap in Kuwait City is saddening. My thoughts are with all those who have lost their near and dear ones. I pray that the injured recover at the earliest. The Indian Embassy in Kuwait is closely monitoring the situation and working with the authorities there to assist the affected," PM Modi said on X (formerly Twitter).

Jaishankar also expressed deep shock over the incident and assured that the Indian embassy in Kuwait would provide "fullest assistance" to all concerned.
Officials said most of the Indian victims are from Kerala.
"In connection with the tragic fire accident involving Indian workers today, Embassy has put in place an emergency helpline number: +965-65505246. All concerned are requested to connect over this helpline for updates. Embassy remains committed to render all possible assistance," the Indian Embassy in Kuwait said in a post on X.
Non-Resident Keralites Affairs has also started a Help Desk related to the incident of fire in Kuwait. The following are the numbers-
+965 90039594, +965 66893942, +965 60615153, +965 66015200, +965 51714124, +965 55575492, +965 99861103, +965 60311882, +965 65589453, +96 555464554, + 96599122984 Non-resident Keralites can contact the 24-hour NORCA Global Contact Center on toll-free numbers 1800 425 3939 (from India) +91-8802 012 345 (from abroad, missed call service).

The fire in the Al-Mangaf building was reported to authorities in Al-Ahmadi governorate at 4:30 am, with most of the deaths attributed to smoke inhalation. Kuwaiti media reported that the fire started in a kitchen.
Kuwait's interior ministry confirmed that the death toll had reached 49.
"Deeply shocked by the news of the fire incident in Kuwait city. There are reportedly over 40 deaths and over 50 have been hospitalized. Our Ambassador has gone to the camp. We are awaiting further information," Jaishankar said on X.
"Deepest condolences to the families of those who tragically lost their lives. Wish early and full recovery to those who have been injured," he added.

Indian ambassador to Kuwait Adarsh Swaika visited several hospitals, including those where the injured have been admitted.
The construction firm NBTC group had rented the building for the stay of over 195 workers, most of them Indians from Kerala, Tamil Nadu, and northern states, according to Kuwaiti media. The NBTC group is partly owned by an Indian, officials said.
Kuwait's Interior Ministry stated that criminal evidence department personnel are working on identifying the victims and determining the cause of the fire. They promised strict measures against building owners who violate norms.
"Unfortunately, we received a report of a fire at... exactly 6:00 am (0300 GMT) in the Mangaf area," major general Eid Al-Owaihan, head of the interior ministry's General Department of Criminal Evidence, said.

Kuwait's health ministry reported that the injured were admitted to several hospitals, with 21 sent to Al-Adan Hospital, six to Farwaniya hospital, one to Al-Amiri, and 11 to Mubarak hospital.
Officials in Delhi confirmed that Indian embassy officials are visiting the hospitals where the victims were taken. The exact number of deaths and injuries will be known once details are confirmed.
"Amb @AdarshSwaika visited the Al-Adan hospital where over 30 Indian workers injured in today's fire incident have been admitted. He met a number of patients and assured them of full assistance from the Embassy," the Indian embassy said on X.
"Almost all are reported to be stable by hospital authorities," the statement added.
Ambassador Swaika also visited the site of the fire.
The Indian embassy is in touch with Kuwaiti law enforcement authorities, the fire service, and the health department for necessary action.
Kuwait's interior minister Sheikh Fahad Al-Yousuf Al-Sabah ordered an investigation into the fire and directed the apprehension of the building's owner and janitor. "What happened today is a result of the greed of the company and building owners," Al-Sabah was quoted as saying by Kuwait Times.
Kuwait's Deputy Prime Minister Sheikh Fahad Yusuf Saud Al-Sabah visited the fire site and attributed the incident to violations of norms and the greed of real estate owners. Kuwaiti authorities have commenced an investigation into the fire.
(With inputs from agencies)