NEW DELHI: In an example of India's rising global stature and recognition of its effective anti-pirating operations in the Indian Ocean region, Bulgaria's deputy prime minister Mariya Gabriel on Sunday extended her gratitude to the Indian Navy for successfully rescuing 7 Bulgarians who were part of a crew that was being held hostage by pirates aboard a hijacked ship.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo

"I express my gratitude to the Indian navy for the successful operation to rescue the hijacked vessel Ruen & its crew members, including 7 BG nationals. Thank you for support & great effort. We continue to work together to protect lives of the crew," said Gabriel, who is also the minister of foreign affairs.
In a heart-warming response, external affairs minister Jaishankar replied: "That’s what friends are for."
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndo40-hour operation
In an operation that lasted for 40 hours, the Indian Navy on Saturday recaptured a ship from Somali pirates off the Indian coast, rescuing the crew and ending a three-month takeover of the Maltese-flagged bulk carrier MV Ruen.
The December hijacking of the ship was the first time since 2017 that any cargo vessel had been successfully boarded by Somali pirates.
The Indian warship Kolkata "in the last 40 hours, through concerted actions successfully cornered and coerced all 35 Pirates to surrender & ensured safe evacuation of 17 crew members," the Navy had posted on X.
Bulgarian owner Navibulgar hailed the Ruen's release as "a major success not only for us, but for the entire global maritime community".
Besides the 7 Bulgarians, there were nine Myanmar nationals and one Angolan national.
The pirated ship was recaptured nearly 2,600 kilometres from the Indian coast.
Precision airdrop from C-17 aircraft
The navy kept tabs on the ship throughout the period and finally decided to launch a rescue operation on Saturday.
A C-17 aircraft of the Indian Air Force executed a precision air-born drop of two boats along with Indian Navy MARCOS in the Arabian Sea.
In a post on X, the Indian Air Force, hailing the operation, stated: "In a remarkable display of Jointness & Integration, an IAF C-17 aircraft executed a precision Airborne Drop of two Combat Rubberised Raiding Craft (CRRC) boats, along with Indian Navy MARCOS in the Arabian Sea in support of ongoing anti-piracy Op Sankalp."

"Flying for almost 10 hrs to an area 2600 kms off the Indian Coast, the Op was carried out to rescue crew of bulk carrier vessel MV Ruen. The ship was hijacked by Somali pirates near Yemeni island of Socotra recently. Working seamlessly with @indiannavy, the mission was successful with all the 17 crew on-board recovered safely," the Indian Air Force added.
(With inputs from agencies)