NEW DELHI: A helicopter carrying Iranian president Ebrahim Raisi has crashed in east Azerbaijan, according to several media reports on Sunday. Rescuers are trying to reach the site of the "incident", state television reported. There was no immediate elaboration on what happened to the helicopter.
Iran has confirmed that the president was onboard the chopper along with foreign minister Hossein Amir Abdollahian as well as two senior east Azerbaijan leaders. Top Picks For YouWho is Iranian President Ebrahim Raisi, whose chopper has crashed in AzerbaijanIran president Raisi's chopper crash: What we know so far

Iran's interior minister said the search and rescue operation was being hampered by heavy fog and adverse weather conditions. "We are still hopeful but information coming from the crash site is very concerning," an Iranian official told Reuters, speaking on condition of anonymity.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoState TV stopped all its regular programming to show prayers being held for Raisi across the country and, in a corner of the screen, live coverage of rescue teams searching the mountainous area on foot in heavy fog.

As per Tehran Times, there were 3 helicopters in the president's convoy, two of which safely reached their destination.
Raisi was in east Azerbaijan province to inaugurate the Qiz-Qalasi Dam.
Iran flies a variety of helicopters in the country, but international sanctions make it difficult to obtain parts for them. Its military air fleet also largely dates back to before the 1979 Islamic Revolution.
Raisi, 63, is a hard-liner who formerly led the country's judiciary. He is viewed as a protégé of Iran's Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei and some analysts have suggested he could replace the 85-year-old leader after his death or resignation from the role.
What happens in case of Raisi's death
In case of a sudden death, the Iranian constitution says the first vice president – who is now Mohammad Mokhber – is going to take the job of president, by the approval of the supreme leader.
According to the Iranian political hierarchy, the head of the state is Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei and the president is considered the head of the government, the second-in-command.
When the second-in-command is dead, then the first vice president is going to be in charge and in 50 days the country needs to go to an election to elect a new president.
This is a developing story