PHASIDEWA: Armed with cellphones and selfie sticks, hundreds of people from far and wide converged at the train accident site next to Nirmal Jote village, around 12 km from Siliguri. They were taking photographs and making reels near the mangled coaches tossed on both sides of the tracks on Monday and Tuesday. 
In what was one of the worst displays of disaster tourism, there were even some who set up small businesses and began selling water and snacks to people who were converging at the site on bikes, scooters, and even hired cars and totos from places as far as Matigara, Fulbari, and Bagdogra, apart from nearby villages. 
"I had only heard about accidents like Gaisal but had never seen a real train accident. I wanted to come here on Monday itself, but it was raining heavily, so I deferred the visit to Tuesday. I took my scooter and drove with a friend from Fulbari," said Md Rezzak, who was found taking selfies next to a mangled general coach with his friend Md Nazrul. 
Standing outside a toppled coach and taking groupfies was a homemaker with her two sons and husband who had a one-hour ride on a bike from Bagdogra to reach the site. "We don't witness such scenes often. Since I saw it on TV, I knew I had to come and see it in person," said Chaitali Das. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoSome of the overenthusiastic ones even tried to sneak into the mangled coaches, and some even picked items left behind by harried and injured passengers as cops had a tough time managing the crowd. 
"We are thankful to the residents who were the first to start the rescue operations, but now that we have the situation under control and are trying to resume normal services, these locals are proving to be a challenge to keep off the tracks. At some points, they are even outnumbering the people working on the tracks," said a senior railway official in charge of the repair of tracks.
Cops and railway officials even put up ropes to keep off the curious visitors and had deployed dedicated men just to drive them away and keep the tracks clean. There was one officer who was moving with a loudhailer, constantly asking people to stay off the tracks and allow railway personnel to finish the restoration work.
"Even in local fairs, we don't get so many people at a time. I sensed an opportunity and bought some chips, cigarettes, and other snacks and made quick business," said Sk Rafiqul, a local resident.