BENGALURU: The fire that ravaged Raksha Health Care hospital in Yelahanka’s Rajanukunte area Tuesday morning couldn’t bare its fatal flames as, alerted by the smoke emanating from the building, locals swung into action and rushed to assist the hospital staff. 
There were 16 patients and 30 staff members in the hospital when the fire was noticed around 8.45am in the basement.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThere were patients on the first, second, and third floors. The thick smoke resulted in poor visibility and difficulties in breathing, and a few women staffers who managed to run out of the ground floor and basement stood outside shouting for help. 
According to eyewitnesses and rescue operation participants, a group of about 15 local residents, most in their 20s, swung into action. From the staff, they took down details of the patients and how to reach the top floors, before entering the building. The ramps built for accessing all the floors provided perfect paths to evacuate the ill.
Ramesh, a resident of Rajanukunte, told TOI, “I had come to buy medicines from the pharmacy in the hospital building. I noticed the smoke and joined the team that entered the hospital to evacuate the people stuck inside. We could hardly see anything in the building. People standing a foot away were also not visible. Somehow, we evacuated the people on the ground floor, but entering the first and second floors wasn’t easy.”
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoHe continued: “The patients’ attendants were screaming for help. Following their screams, we fanned out across the first and second floors. We broke the glasses of windows and side walls so the smoke could exit the building. Simultaneously, we brought the patients out with the help of the ramp on one side of the building, which is regularly used by the hospital staff. A few patients were put on stretchers and brought down. Some were carried out along with their beds.” 
Another rescuer, Ranganath, said, “One of my friends, Sharukh Khan, was admitted to the hospital. I came to see him and found the fire in the basement. I joined a few others who were rescuing the patients. At one point, our eyes were burning, we were finding it very difficult to breathe. We thought we would fall sick or may lose our lives in the rescue operation, but we were lucky to rescue them and come out of the building safely.”
He added that two patients, who were on ventilators, were the last ones to be brought out. 
The residents and hospital staff not only alerted the fire and emergency services but also called ambulances from nearby hospitals. By 9.30am, seven ambulances were on the hospital premises to shift the patients elsewhere.
Dr Arya, the duty doctor at the time, told TOI, “I can’t explain what exactly happened. But when the smoke occupied the building, I was on first-floor rounds. We couldn’t see anything in the smoke. Fortunately, all of them (patients) were rescued. After the fire was put out, I visited the hospitals and the patients’ residences to check on their condition.”