BALLARI: Several mining companies based in Ballari are pouring out 670 MLD of water annually - which is about 46% of the water (1,470 MLD) consumed by Bengaluru city on a single day - on roads across the district to bring down the unsettled dust and thereby safeguard citizens from choking dust pollution.
The prolonged dry spell and severe drought, coupled with the depleting groundwater table, has left the whole of Ballari district literally smeared in thick cakes of mining dust all over.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
With fine dust particles all along roadsides and small alleys threatening to trigger respiratory infections, mining companies have continued to drench the streets with water.
While transporting the iron and manganese ore by rail, instead of road, can help end the problem to a large extent, for the time being, mining companies have found a temporary solution by watering the streets.
More than 200 tanker trucks are being hired on a per-kilometre basis to spray water on roads. Besides, 10 tankers of minimum 10 thousand-litre capacity are also being used by each of the mines daily.
Currently, a total of 14 mines are excavating iron and manganese ore, resulting in rising dust pollution, which is so intense that even trees dotting the roadsides in Sandur, Hospet, Thoranagal, Yeshwantnagar, Narayanpur and Rajapur appear to have been painted in a crimson hue.
The situation turns particularly worse with motorists driving down these dustbowl of streets, forcing many to switch on their headlights even during the day.
The installation of a conveyor belt rail track for transporting mined ore could put an end to this ordeal. Recently, a team of state govt officials had visited the district and identified the exact location for the installation of this conveyor belt track.
"If the project is implemented, transportation of ore by road will stop and provide us with some relief, but the project is still on the drawing board," said Srishail, secretary of Sandur Nagarika Hitarakshana Horata Samithi.
Sayyad Dada Qalandar, RFO of Sandur North Forest Range and DK Girishakumar, RFO of South Forest Range, suggested an easy solution to the problem: "The companies obtain forest clearance for the roads at the time of getting mine leases. If the state govt insists that companies must asphalt the road, the dust pollution can be tackled to a certain extent."