Pune: Meghna Mahendra Sakpal always heard stories of rescue operations from her father, grandfather and their friends who worked with the Pune fire brigade.
“My father was part of many high-risk rescue operations. I would often hear about his experience during such operations. My grandfather, too, was part of such rescue operations during his days in the fire brigade.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoTheir tales inspired me to dream of a similar career,” said Sakpal (26), who became Pune’s first and only woman among 167 fire fighters recruited by Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) recently.
Only Mumbai and Chennai fire brigades have women firefighters. 
Sakpal’s grandfather retired from the city fire brigade in 2002, while her father is posted with the Janata Vasahat fire station. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreCity fire brigade chief Devendra Potphode told TOI, “Sakpal is the first woman firefighter in the history of Pune fire brigade. Women firefighters in Mumbai are also doing well. The state has a good training facility for men and women in Mumbai. Once Sakpal joins our force after her medical and other post-recruitment formalities in a fortnight, she will have field experience, too. We are hoping that more women will join the city fire brigade.”
Sakpal, a commerce graduate, who received her training at the Maharashtra Fire Services Academy in Mumbai, said, “I have a fascination for service in uniform. I like to perform well and execute rescue operations in emergency situations like my father, Mahendra and my gradfather Sadashiv. I grew up in this atmosphere, where everyone congratulated each other for their heroics in rescue and relief operations. During my college days, I decided to pursue hotel management, but gave up the idea soon.”
Sakpal’s brother is a software engineer and her sister is married. Her mother passed away in 2017. She looked after her family and worked hard to qualify in the physical and written examinations. 
Fire station officer Vijay Bhilare said, “I have seen her growing up. She was a bright and active child and had a fascination for the service.” “I will wear the uniform and hope many other women will join this unexplored territory,” she said. Her father said, “I am happy that she decided to join the fire brigade. The legacy continues…”