NEW DELHI: A girl buried for over 16 hours in the rubble of a house collapsed after the powerful storm has been rescued by a search team in southeastern Brazil. 
The girl's father, who was found dead next to her on Saturday morning, had "heroically protected the girl with his body," a neighbour reportedly said.
At least dozens of people have been killed in the storm, which has prompted the authorities to deploy teams to the mountainous areas of Rio de Janeiro state.PollDo you think Joe Biden will drop out of the US presidential race?YesNoThe authorities have described the situation "critical", which has been caused by the deluge.
Four people were killed after a house collapsed due to a the fatal storm.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA Institute"We are in pain, but grateful for this miracle," said Luis Claudio de Souza, 63.
Brazil, South America's largest country, is grappling with severe weather events, likely exacerbated by climate change. Rio de Janeiro reported eight fatalities, with four dead and seven missing in Espirito Santo. The deluge vividly points to the increasing impact of extreme weather in the region.
Such environmental tragedies "are intensifying with climate change," President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva said in a post on X. Lula said thousands had been left homeless by the storm.
He expressed sympathy for the victims, and said his government was working with state and local authorities to "protect, prevent and repair flood damage."
Espirito Santo's governor Renato Casagrande said the situation in the town of Mimoso do Sul was "chaotic," with the number of fatalities there yet to be determined.
And in Sao Paolo state, two children were hospitalized for injuries sustained during the storm on Friday.
Rio Governor Claudio Castro on Friday said the situation in Petropolis was "critical" due to "intense rains and the overflowing of the Quitandinha River."
Dozens of soldiers accompanied by dogs have been dispatched to the scene in Rio state, as schools welcomed those who were displaced, Castro confirmed. 
An emergency committee report, involving Rio government and civil defense officials, stated that approximately 90 individuals have been rescued since Friday. 
Local media images depicted torrents of water, mud, and debris cascading down hills in the scenic town of Petropolis, where a devastating storm in February 2022 claimed the lives of at least 241 people. 
In Mimoso do Sul, a fire truck was observed being swept down a street by the strong currents. The state fire department released photos on Saturday showing entire neighborhoods submerged, with only the house roofs visible.
(With AFP inputs)