NEW DELHI: June 2, 2019, was a day when Parikul Bhardwaj proved to be an angel. That day, she saved the lives of many pilgrims at Kedarnath who suddenly fell ill due to the extreme cold at an altitude of 14,000 feet. She took them to Six Sigma High Altitude Hospital. For the 17-year-old Bhardwaj, the mountains are her calling and she devotes her summer vacation every year to travel to the snowy heights and save lives.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoShe is, in fact, acknowledged as the youngest woman social worker and high-altitude rescuer.
“I used to visit the temple in the evening and I could see many people in the queue suffering from medical conditions because of the extreme weather condition,” recalled Bhardwaj about that day. “They required medical intervention but they didn’t want to leave the queue. I not only provided them with warm water and food, but also got them to take medicines on time.” Those who needed focused medical treatment were taken to the hospital near the temple.
The teenager has been working with her doctor parents in the mountainous Kedarnath region for years, helping tourists, trekkers and pilgrims with medical services. “Since both my parents are doctors who have specialised in mountain medicine, I often watched them helping people in high altitude areas. This inspired me to follow in their footsteps. Whenever I helped someone, the grateful smiles on their faces made my day,” she said.
From 2017 to 2023, Bhardwaj provided 45 days of non-stop social services every year to the pilgrims at Kedarnath at temperatures of minus 7 degrees Celsius. Her efforts have been recognised with several awards, among them the Pradhanmantri Rashtriya Bal Shakti Puruskar in 2020, given by the President of India in the field of social service.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreNow pursuing her bachelor’s degree in management studies from Symbiosis International University, Pune, the girl has received varied training in mountaineering and high-altitude rescue from the Indian Army, Indian Air Force, ITBP, BSF, National Disaster Relief Force, High Altitude Warfare School, Gulmarg, Nehru Institute of Mountaineering, Uttarkashi, Indian Institute of Skiing and Mountaineering, Gulmarg, Six Sigma and BRO in Ladakh.
With extraordinary skills and admiral courage, bravery, passion, dedication and commitment, Bhardwaj is providing a highly risky social service in the mountains to all individuals regardless of class, creed or religion. She said, “I just want to say to everyone, whatever they do, just be humble about it and help each other out.”
Her aim is to benchmark practices in management and to establish an institute of high altitude training and rescue. “Almost 11 states in India have high altitude regions. I want the people to gain more knowledge about this field,” she said.