Han shot first at Greedo. No amount of special editions or George Lucas declarations will change that, even if, uh, Lucas actually did change that scene. A rebellion began in 1997, when Lucasfilm first released altered "special editions" of the first trilogy, adding new or revised scenes, computer-generated effects and expanded worlds. Ever since, fans have clamoured for high-definition releases of the unaltered movies.PollDo you think Joe Biden will drop out of the US presidential race?YesNoLucas has resisted and has continued altering them, insisting he is fulfilling his vision, which was technologically and financially impossible when they were first made
So if you want to see the original "Star Wars" trilogy - as they were shown in theatres, a bit softer and grainier (and with Han Solo definitely shooting the bounty hunter Greedo first, not in self-defence, as he now does) - you'll have to rely on some rebel fans like Robert Williams. Williams, a Philadelphia-based computer programmer, is part of a group of five people called Team Negative One, one of a few "Star Wars" fan groups that, for more than a decade, have collected 35 mm prints of the first "Star Wars" movies and laboriously restored them in 4K. Known as Project 4K, the movies are titled by the years they were released: 4K77, 4K80 and 4K83. The restorations are not authorised and come from film reels that were meant to be returned or destroyed after cinemas were done with them. While their legality is in question, fans and preservationists argue public has a right to view art in its original form. 
In Feb, Team Negative One announced the completion of the trilogy project, with a 4K version of "The Empire Strikes Back". Williams said his group's sources for the reels had included eBay and collectors who had them in storage. Once the film is scanned, the team goes through it frame by frame, cleaning, and upgrading it, and finally digitising it.The first restoration was done in 2016 with "A New Hope". "The Empire Strikes Back" took 7 years because the print was a damaged one. 
Many of Lucas' edits were cosmetic changes. But some changes shifted character arcs, such as the scene with Greedo and Han Solo, played by Harrison Ford. In the 1977 release - later re-titled "A New Hope" - Han shoots and kills the bounty hunter, without provocation, setting up a redemptive arc. Since the 1997 edition, Han fires in self-defence, an edit that drew scorn from some fans, who took up "Han shot first" as a battle cry. NYT