NAVI MUMBAI: For the first time in their 25 years of existence, the social workers who run the New Panvel based homeless shelter Social and Evangelical Association for Love (SEAL) Ashram have realized the "power of vote". A total of 125 rescued homeless persons at their shelter have succeeded in acquiring brand new voter ID cards, and so are quite excited to go ahead and cast their votes in the upcoming Phase-4 of the elections in Maval constituency.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
This electoral addition of 125 names has been quickly noticed by various political party workers who have now started visiting SEAL Ashram to campaign for their candidates, and also to know if the rescued homeless persons are facing any issues that can be later resolved.
Pastor Biju Samuel who is second-in-command at SEAL told TOI: "We are happy that our shelter home in New Panvel is now finally showing in the political radars of various parties, since we now have 125 newly registered voters. For the past quarter century, the local politicians were hardly interested in homeless people and their problems, only because they did not have the power to vote. But, now they do."
There is an interesting backstory on how the rescued inmates at SEAL actually became voters. "During the Covid lockdown period, in the year 2021, we were desperately trying to get the vaccinations done for all our shelter home inmates. But, none of them had any legit ID cards at that time. That is when the then Raigad district collector, Nidhi Choudhari, had personally taken interest in our peculiar problem and successfully issued Aadhaar cards for all of them," said Samuel.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoHe added that through the biometrics of the individuals in the Aadhaar cards, SEAL also managed to reunite 25 of their inmates with their families across India. As the SEAL founder, Pastor K M Philip, said: "Our primary mission is to rescue homeless people from the streets and also try to reunite them with their family members. We have also started Rescunite Program (rescue-reunite) in this regard."
Sixty eight-year-old rescued homeless man, Ghanshyam Chavan, happily held his new ID card, and said: "I used to earlier stay at Lalbaug area in central Mumbai, but later I lost my family and also my money. I did odd jobs, and also worked in the maintenance department of Cidco (city and industrial development corporation). Due to my advancing age, some kind lady brought me to SEAL Ashram. I will surely vote now on the polling day."
However, some of the rescued inmates were confused as to whom to vote for as they do not actively follow politics at the shelter home. A rescued woman from Rajapur in Ratnagiri district, Ashatai Mhatre (65), said: "I have lost contact with all my family members. I had nowhere to go, but SEAL rescued me. I am happy to get my voter ID card."
However, when asked who she will vote for, Ashatai simply shrugged her shoulders, indicating that she does not know yet.
Since some of the homeless persons were also mentally disoriented at the time of rescue, a question being raised is if they can properly follow the electronic voting process on EVM. To this, Samuel said: "We will give them a basic tutorial on how to vote at the polling booth. Many of our inmates are keen learners, so I am certain that they will be able to vote."
From May 22 onwards, SEAL will also launch a major rescue programme to pick up and rescue a maximum number of homeless people from city areas.