Lucknow: Hours after being rescued from captivity of an ex-militant group by Baghmara district police of Meghalaya, Lucknow man Akhilesh Singh Chauhan recalled the trauma he went through as hostage in the dense jungle of South Garo hills. The kidnappers had sought a ransom of Rs 50 lakh for his safe release. Akhilesh said he tried to explain to them that arranging Rs 50 lakh was not possible as he was a poor man, but they refused to listen.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoHe was thrashed with his hands and legs tied to a tree during his confinement, till he was eventually rescued by Meghalaya police and two of his kidnappers arrested. 
Akhilesh's wife Sheela met CM Yogi Adityanath earlier on Friday morning and thanked him for his efforts in securing her husband’s release.
Hours after the UP CM spoke to Meghalaya CM Conrad Sangma over the phone requesting for the recovery of the abducted Lucknow mechanic, Akhilesh was recovered from the jungle of Baghmara district after a more than 48-hour operation by Baghmara district police of Meghalaya.
On the intervening night of Tuesday and Wednesday, around 1:40 am, the heavy-duty equipment mechanic from Lucknow was kidnapped by two-gun wielding men from the makeshift camp next to an under-construction Rongdik bridge on NH-217 under Siju police limits. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoAkhilesh (50) was working with a private company involved in bridge construction.
“In the wee hours of March 20, while I was asleep, someone was continuously knocking at the door of my makeshift camp. As soon as I opened it, two men armed with country-made weapons pounced at me and dragged me towards a bike. In the middle of the night, they took me into the jungle at gunpoint,” said Akhilesh who originally hails from Dullahpur village of Ghazipur district.
For the last three years, Akhilesh has been working in Meghalaya on various construction projects.
“I tried to explain to the men that I’m a poor man, but they didn’t understand Hindi. They continued to hit me and tied me up to a tree in the jungle. They gave me biscuits and water during my confinement and asked me to arrange a ransom of Rs 50 lakh with the help of my contractor,” said Akhilesh.
Late on Thursday, Baghmara district police led by superintendent of police Shailendra Bamaniya in a well-coordinated operation rescued Akhilesh from the jungle and apprehended two men who were identified as ex-militants.
The accused were identified as Wilban M Sangma (30) and Withmil S Marak (29) and they were booked under IPC’s section 364A (kidnapping for ransom) by Siju police.
Bamaniya said, “Akhilesh was abducted by an ex-militant group. We have apprehended two men and are searching for two more. During the rescue operation, Akhilesh's safety was paramount; therefore, we first secured him and then went on to arrest the accused men involved in the crime.”
He added, “The group wanted to extort ransom from the construction company with which Akhilesh worked. Two more accomplices of the apprehended duo are still absconding. Our team is searching for them.”
Sheela with her three children lives in a rented accommodation in Beniganj on Kursi Road of Lucknow. "From the bottom of my heart, I’m thankful to CM Yogi Adityanath and Meghalaya police for successfully rescuing my husband,” She said after meeting the CM on Friday.
Akhilesh is expected to return to Lucknow in the next couple of days to celebrate Holi with his family.