Hyderabad: A job racket involving a China company — operating in Cambodia and committing cyber frauds — was busted by Cambodian police following an alert by Rajanna Sircilla district police.
A graduate from Sircilla district, who was sent to Sihanoukville, a coastal city in Cambodia, 230 km from capital city Phnom Penh, three months ago by the fraudsters to work in the Chinese firm, has been rescued and is being brought back to Telangana, district police said on Saturday. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo

Another youth from Jagtial was also reportedly sent to Cambodia, sources said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreA person from Jagtial, who worked as a chef in Maldives, and his friend from Pune were arrested by Sircilla police in connection with the job racket. District superintendent of police Akhil Mahajan said K Sai Prasad of Jagtial and Abid Ansari of Pune were arrested. Two other associates — Sadakat from Lucknow and Shadaab of Dubai — are at large.
China Link
During a preliminary investigation, police found that Ansari was operating the racket by sending youngsters to Cambodia by using his contacts with Shadaab, who has links with Chinese nationals in Cambodia. 
Shiva, who was sent by Prasad three months ago, was told that his nature of work would be ‘software operations’. Shiva of Peddur village was promised a salary of 50,000 a month.
He, however, was forced to slog in the Chinese firm for 16 hours a day and commit cyber frauds. Police said Shiva’s work was to call up people in India, lure them with offers of jobs, task-based part-time jobs, lottery, etc., and cheat them. “He was paid a month’s salary,” sources said.
Prasad worked as a chef in a Maldives restaurant where he got in touch with Sadakat and became friends. Sadakat told Prasad that he could earn easy money by sending youngsters to Cambodia on the pretext of job offers. Prasad referred Shiva’s name to Ansari as he is an old acquaintance of Shiva’s brother, sources said.
Police stumbled upon the racket after Shiva’s mother A Lakshmi approached the district SP and told him about her son’s ordeal. 
“Lakshmi told us that her son had gone to Cambodia after paying 1.40 lakh to Prasad. Shiva was calling up his mother to save him from the torture and that he cannot continue doing the unethical job,” Mahajan said. 
Passport taken away
Before Shiva joined the firm, the company representatives took away his passport and kept it with them. After registering a criminal case following Lakshmi’s complaint, district police contacted Indian embassy in Cambodia, who in turn, alerted Cambodian police, who conducted searches on the company which was operating in three floors of a complex in Sihanoukville.
After establishing contact with Shiva, local police came to know that the firm had also employed hundreds of Indians to commit cyber frauds in India. “For now, the company’s operations have been disrupted. For sending Shiva to Cambodia, Prasad and Sadakat earned a commission of 10,000 each,” sources said.