NEW DELHI: A team of around 24 Delhi cops doggedly went after a kidnapper — poring over CCTV footage, camping in agricultural fields, temples, and dhabas, tapping into local informers and conducting door-to-door search — before swooping on him at a railway station between Bulandshahr and Sambhal last Sunday. The gripping chase that spanned 100km in west UP for five days ended with his victim, a 7-year-old child of one of his neighbours in Northeast Delhi’s Dayalpur, being rescued unharmed and reunited with his parents.
Viresh alias Veeru (46) had abducted the boy on March 13 in a bid to settle an old score with his family and extort money from them.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoHe whisked the boy away to Sambhal and called up his parents for ransom. With the cops tailing him, Viresh tried to drown him before he took him to Rajgarh local railway station, presumably to flee to another state, where he was cornered. He was booked for kidnapping for ransom and attempted murder.
After receiving a call within hours of the boy going missing, a team of cops led by SHO (Dayalpur) Atul Tyagi swung into action. While analysing CCTV footages and conducting technical surveillance, police were able to zero in on the identity of the suspect. Viresh’s last location was traced to a temple in Sambhal and soon the team of cops were hot on his trail.

    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MorePhotos of the child and kidnapper were shown to the locals, but it yielded no leads. The team of cops then scanned dharamshalas and various temples in Sambhal. Announcements about the child were also made at mosques and temples. Later, they received information about the child’s location in Rajgarh. The team rushed to the village and contacted the sarpanch. Together with the villagers, they conducted a door-to-door search.
“Based on a tip-off, some cops reached the local railway station and spotted Viresh hiding there. Upon noticing the cops, he abandoned the child and attempted to flee. However, the cops apprehended him after a chase,” DCP Joy Tirkey said.