MUMBAI: A police officer was injured by a glass shard, while 25 to 30 residents were rescued after a major fire broke out in a 62-storey residential building in Byculla late on Saturday.
The blaze originated in flat number 1002 on the 10th floor of Monte South building's A Wing in Khatao Mill Compound near the Mumbai Fire Brigade headquarters at 11.42pm.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoIt was doused after three hours - around 2.45am.
The building's fire suppression system proved crucial till the fire brigade fully mobilised their equipment.
Deputy fire officer (special operations) S D Sawant said, "A passerby informed the fire brigade about the blaze. When we reached the spot, we found that smoke had accumulated in the 10th floor flat as the windows were shut. We broke the glass windows to allow the smoke to escape, but flames reached the 11th floor flat where the windows were open. So, we had to extend the firefighting operations to the 11th floor too."
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe fire was confined to the electric wiring, electrical installations, wooden furniture, household articles, wardrobe, mattresses, wooden beds, sofa, curtains, electronic appliances, false ceiling, doors, windows, modular kitchen in flat number 1002, and curtains in flat number 1102 on the 11th floor. During firefighting operations, the refrigerator compressor in flat number 1002 exploded, said officials. 
Firemen had to use breathing apparatus sets to access the area as thick smoke filled the passageway. But as the staircases were clear of smoke, 25-30 stranded residents were safely brought down from the stairway. "After the fire was extinguished, Pandurang Shinde from Agripada police station was inspecting the premises when a glass shard struck his nose. He was initially taken to the civic-run Nair hospital and was later admitted to Wockhardt Hospital," said a BMC officer.
While the cause of the fire is yet to be determined, fire officials pointed out that the adjoining flat was undergoing renovation.