NEW DELHI: At least twelve lives were claimed and dozens were injured after a bus fell into a mine pit in Durg district of Chhattisgarh on Tuesday. 
The rescue operations are underway and the senior police officials were on the spot. 
According to the officials, the toll might rise as the rescue is still going on and victims were badly wounded. The workers belong to a private distillery company of Durg and they were returning home when the bus met an accident near Khapri.
Sharing details of the incident, Durg Collector Richa Prakash Choudhary said 12 passengers were killed and 14 grievously hurt after the bus, packed with workers, fell into a ditch in Durg.
"The bus carrying labourers fell into a ditch near Kumhari around 8.30 pm, resulting in the deaths of approximately 12 individuals while 14 others were injured and admitted to a hospital," Choudhary said.
"Twelve of the injured were referred and shifted to AIIMS (Raipur), while the remaining two are receiving treatment at a private hospital. All of them are currently in stable condition and we are providing them with the best possible care," the Collector added.
Meanwhile, President Draupadi Murmu and Prime Minister Narendra Modi also expressed their grief over the incident.
Taking to X, the President said, "The news of many people getting killed in a bus accident in Durg district of Chhattisgarh is very sad. My deepest condolences to all the bereaved families! I wish for the speedy recovery of the injured."

Prime Minister Narendra Modi also expressed his grief and tweeted, "The bus accident in Durg, Chhattisgarh is extremely sad. My condolences to those who lost their loved ones in this. Along with this, I wish for the speedy recovery of the injured. Under the supervision of the state government, the local administration is engaged in helping the victims in every possible way."

According to the police the bus was carrying 40 workers and the driver possibly lost control when the bus fell into a mine pit, about 40 feet deep.