Ghaziabad: Two boys taking a bath in the Ganga canal in Muradnagar were feared drowned — just 50 metres and two hours apart — on Sunday evening. Till late on Monday, NDRF teams were still engaged in a rescue operation.
DCP (rural) Vivek Yadav said both incidents occurred in Chhota Haridwar, where people visit temples that line the Ganga canal and take a dip in the waterbody.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoBut in both cases, the boys had gone for an outing with friends. 

Sujit (16) and three of his friends from Sevanagar had gone for a picnic by the canal around 3pm on Sunday. With the sun blazing over them, the four decided to take a plunge in the canal. While three managed to swim ashore, Sujit was washed away by the strong current of the canal, which branches out of the Ganga river.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteSujit’s friends frantically looked for him for a while and then informed his father when they failed to trace him. 
“Around 9.30pm, the boy’s father reached Muradnagar police station and informed cops about his missing son. A police team started searching the canal along with five divers. The NDRF was informed too,” Yadav said.
CCTV footage showed Sujit’s friends had even hired a boat to scan a portion of the canal and look for him, but to no avail.
Sunny Kumar (21) and five friends had come from Delhi to Chhota Haridwar to spend a Sunday there.
“Around 5pm, they went to bathe in the canal, merely 50m from the spot where Sujit was last seen. While taking a bath, Sunny and his friend Nisha started drowning. When their friends raised an alarm, some divers present nearby jumped into the water and pulled Nisha out. But they could not rescue Sunny,” the DCP said.
Nisha was taken to a nearby hospital, where she is undergoing treatment. “Their friends had planned to spend the Sunday in Chhota Haridwar. After a dip in the Ganga canal in the evening, they planned to have dinner together before heading back to their houses,” Yadav told TOI.
Sunny, he said, drove an e-rickshaw for a living.
Police have now decided to allow only devotees who visit the temples in Chhota Haridwar to take a bath in the canal.
“We must enforce this. A police team is being deployed around the canal to stop people from taking a plunge merely for a bath. We will also seek the help of temple authorities to prevent devotees from crowding around the ghats. Picnics and other such gatherings can’t be allowed,” the DCP said.