NEW DELHI: As many as 21 minors were rescued from different parts of the national capital as part of an operation carried out by National Commission for Protection of Child Rights in coordination with Delhi Police and voluntary organisation Bachpan Bachao Andolan (BBA).
According to the commission, the intervention of the office of the lieutenant governor of Delhi was urgently sought to direct the district authorities to go ahead and cut open a door to rescue five girls who were found confined in a house in Shakurpur in nothwest Delhi.
NCPCR chairperson Priyank Kanoongo who led the rescue operation said that the commission was acting on the complaint of BBA where they had highlighted that minors had been brought from states like Jharkhand and Bihar in the guise of placing them for domestic work through traffickers working under the cover-up of placement agencies.
In a series of posts put out on X, Kanoongo shared that rescue operations were carried out at 10 places and at one location in Shakurpur where he was himself present and it took nearly five hours to rescue five girls as no one was opening the door. “The authorities - Delhi Police and district magistrate finally cut the door after the LG’s office ordered urgent intervention. We found five girls who were rescued,” Kanoongo said in his post where he also shared videos of the struggle invovled in the rescue operation.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More“Inside the team also found medicines, pregnancy kits, documents of the girls and 10 lakh rupees which have all been seized by the police for further investigation,” Kanoongo told TOI. Similarly teams carried out resuces at locations in Rajouri Garden and Nihal Vihar in West Delhi and Subhash Place in northwest Delhi.
“All 21 minors have been produced before the Child Welfare Committees and if there are any adults among those rescued they will be restored accordingly. The accused persons are in the custody of the police for further action. Going forward we will be issuing directions to the authorties including Delhi govt for ensuring proper restoration and action against the traffickers,” Kanoongo added.
“Till placement agencies are regulated it will be difficult to stop this kind of exploitation of minors,” Kanoongo said.