SILIGURI: The rescue operation for more than 2,000 tourists stranded due to multiple landslides in North Sikkim remained suspended due to inclement weather on Sunday. 
The incessant rain triggered fresh landslides along NH-10, disrupting Sikkim's connectivity with north Bengal and leading to serpentine traffic along the highway. 
In Sikkim, Mangan district magistrate, Hem Kumar Chettri, maintained that they would airlift the stranded tourists on Monday if the weather permits or else they would be rescued by the roadways and the tourists might have to walk for 100 metres where roads were yet to be restored.
 Traffic movement was affected on NH-10 after boulders fell at Likhuvir on Thursday. The district administration said temporary disruptions were still occurring due to falling of boulders at Likhuvir and Melli. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreKalimpong district magistrate, Bala Subramanian, said ensuring the safety of the passengers they had advised the vehicles to take the alternative routes. Traffic diversion had been advised for vehicles from Siliguri and Sikkim at Rangpo and Coronation Bridge.
 "The restoration work is going on full swing," said Chettri. Tourist stranded in Chungthang, who have taken shelter at the gurdwara, raised their grievances over bad network connectivity and requested the Sikkim government for immediate evacuation.
"We have been stuck since June 13. Though we are getting food from the gurdwara, all of us are scared. There is no confirmation of airlifting. We want the govt to take immediate actions so that all stranded tourists can reach home safely. We are far from home, we cannot contact our family members as there is no connectivity," a tourist said. Around 400 to 500 are stranded in Chungthang and around 1,500 in Lachung. "We do not have cash and the ATM is low on power as there is no electricity", said another group of tourists stranded at Chungthang.