New Delhi: On Sunday, the usually vibrant 40ft road in Shaheen Bagh, renowned for its mouthwatering Mughlai cuisine, was grappling with the aftermath of a devastating fire that had engulfed three restaurants, two shops and residential apartments above the eateries the day before.
Parvez, an employee at Zaika restaurant, described the arduous task of trying to control the fire.The staff recognised the importance of removing the gas cylinders to prevent further damage, despite their best efforts.
Parvez recounted: “We used all fire extinguishers to control the situation, but due to strong winds, it was difficult to control the intensity of the blaze. Based on the training given to us, the first thing we remembered was to take out the cylinders before things went out of control. I still remember that when I lifted the fourth cylinder from the ground floor, the fire hadn’t reached the site. But when I came back, it had engulfed the entire façade area. Still, I decided to take a risk and remove the fifth cylinder.” Employees from neighbouring restaurants also pitched in to help with the rescue efforts.
Residents in the area expressed their discontent with the authorities for failing to address the issue of hanging wires, which could potentially cause serious accidents. According to reports, the fire started from a pole near the three affected restaurants — Zaika, Zahra, and Bismillah — and quickly spread, engulfing all three establishments within a short period.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoNizam, who owns a cloth shop in a nearby complex, pointed towards the dangerous cable wires that were either hanging or strung across several poles throughout the area. Although his shop was separated from the restaurants by a 25ft wide road, the façade of his establishment was completely burned in the incident.
“The fire quickly reached our shop because of these wires and strong winds. I was on my way back after offering namaz when someone told me about the incident. I rushed to the place and, haphazardly, pulled down the shutters of my shop. Thankfully, that stopped the flames from going inside. Looking at the population and footfall in the area, the safety of the people can't be compromised, and authorities need to find a solution for this issue,” he said.
Wasim, an employee at the restaurant next to the electricity pole (adjacent to Sir Syed Lane) where the fire originated, stated that a short circuit in the wires strung across the pole triggered the blaze. "Since our restaurant was also on the first floor, we immediately used fire extinguishers to control the situation to some extent. But a sudden spark ignited the bunch of wires dangling from the pole and there was no looking back. Our priority was to save lives," he said, standing opposite the building with his colleagues, unable to sleep after the incident.
The staff who worked relentlessly throughout the night to control the fire now face an uncertain future, as the shops destroyed by the flames will likely take months or even a year to reopen.
Mehboob, a resident living in a house opposite Zahra restaurant, said that a two-wheeler parked outside his house was also partially damaged by the flames. “We left our homes on Saturday out of fear. I wonder how long the place will take to get back to normal," he said.
Samir, owner of a salon shop affected by the fire, alleged that the delay in the arrival of the fire authorities worsened the situation.
“People made as many as 50 calls and many went unanswered. The fire tenders from the station in Jasola reached more than an hour after the first call was made. The products displayed outside my shop were damaged. Thankfully, the flames didn’t enter inside. A shoe shop also incurred heavy losses,” said Samir, who moved to the location two years ago and had no insurance for his shop.
“While officials cited traffic jam for delayed action, the fact is that the location was barely 200-250 metres from main road (GD Birla Marg)," he claimed.
A senior fire official said a crowd had gathered at the spot as soon as the blaze erupted, causing traffic snarls. The congested road further contributed to the delay in the arrival of fire tenders, he said. 
Local councillor Ariba Khanconceded that despite repeated anti-encroachment drives, temporary extension on roads were rampant. "Illegal parking on main and internal roads creates hindrance in smooth movement of traffic. As for dangling wires, we had written to the department concern but no action was taken,” she said.