‘Ashtami’ is a Bengali television show that narrates the story of a girl aiming to spread awareness against injustice under the guise of age-old superstitious practices. The titular character, played by Ritobrota Dey, enters Nabogram as a school-teacher, with the responsibility of educating young minds but is constantly faced with resistance. As per the current track of the show, Purushottam Singha, the zamindar of Nabogram is hell-bent on punishing his daughter Irabati.PollBigg Boss OTT 3: Payal Malik gets eliminated; was it fair?NoYesHe hatches a plan to establish Irabati as Bourani’s vessel for the next one year so that Irabati is stripped of any kind of humane indulgence. He declares in front the whole village that the local deity Bourani has appeared in his dreams and asked him to worship Irabati as the goddess. Irabati is perplexed to hear her father’s words and more shocked at his decision. Irabati is decked up in traditional attire and presented before the villagers. As Purushottam advances to touch Irabati’s feet, she is repulsed by her father’s deeds. All of a sudden a storms arrives and Ashtami sees an opportunity to save Irabati from Purushottam’s grasp. Ashtami takes Irabati along with her and plans to run away. But Durjoy Singha stops them on the way. Durjoy takes out a gun and points at Ashtami. Will Ashtami and Irabati survive this conflict?

 As per the storyline of ‘Ashtami’, the people of Nabogram worship their age-old myth of a local deity known as Bourani. The villagers believe that on a particular day, Bourani possesses her greatest devotee, answers prayers, and warns of impending dangers. Bourani’s vessel used to be the head priest once upon a time, but since his mysterious disappearance a couple of decades ago – the zamindar of the region Purushottam, seems to be the chosen one. Ashtami arrives in Nabogram and quickly realizes that the simple locals are being hoodwinked and taken advantage of, by Purushottam, who poses as a Godman. Ashtami becomes a thorn in Purushottam's side. Purushottam plans to stop Ashtami by hook or crook and that leads to an accident that leaves Ashtami visually impaired. Apart from Ritobrota Dey in the titular role, ‘Ashtami’ features actor Saptarshi Maulik in the role of Ayushmaan and Kaushik Chakrabarty as Purushottam.