While owning a pet sounds like a fun idea, taking care of them through and through is actually a difficult job, especially if you are actors working in a daily soap. And two people who are known to be such pet enthusiasts are Kumkum Bhagya’s lead actor Abrar Qazi and Rachi Sharma, who play the role of Rajvansh and Poorvi in the show. Given they can’t keep any pets, considering they barely spend any time at home, they have started taking care of the furry friends living on their sets.
Abrar and Rachi have begun to treat the stray dogs, especially the ones on set, as their own. They spend plenty of time playing with them, feeding them food and water so that even when they go back home, the cats and dogs don’t go to sleep hungry.
Rachi Sharma said, “Since my childhood, I have always wanted to adopt a dog or a cat, but never got a chance to do so. My mother used to tell me that I can keep one when I grow up, only if I am able to take care of them. Although I have managed to rescue one dog back at my home in Indore because there are people to take proper care of him, but here, as I stay by myself in Mumbai, I can't afford to keep one. My working hours are not fixed, and because of the hectic shoot schedules, I cannot take the responsibility and not live up to it. So, all the stray dogs and cats on our set are like my pets and I love spending time with them. Whenever Abrar and I get time in between the shots, we play with them.”
Abrar Qazi said, “I have always been a very big pet lover and after meeting Rachi and getting to know our mutual love for these furry friends, we spend most of our time with them when we are not shooting. Playing with them and taking care of them is therapeutic and helps us relax in between scenes. We have given cute names to them, and they actually come running to us whenever we call them. it is always a great feeling to be around them.”
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreWell, isn’t that adorable?!
Kumkum Bhagya BTS: Rachi Sharma gives a glimpse of the preparations for Purvi's wedding
In the upcoming episodes of the show, the viewers will get to watch how Monisha (Srishti Jain) is instigating Rajvansh against Poorvi so that he believes Poorvi gave fake notes in the hospital. Will she be successful in creating a drift between them? Or will Poorvi win Rajvansh’s trust once again?
To find out, tune into Kumkum Bhagya, every Monday to Sunday, 9 pm.