Navi Mumbai: With 125 rescued people living in a shelter run by SEAL in New Panvel getting their voter ID cards, workers of various political parties have started visiting the SEAL Ashram to canvass for their candidates and inquire if the inmates have issues that they can resolve. Pastor Biju Samuel, who is second-in-command at SEAL, said “We are happy that our shelter home is finally showing on the political radars of parties.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoFor the past quarter century, local politicians were hardly interested in homeless people and their problems. Now they do.”
There is an interesting backstory to how the rescued homeless at SEAL became voters. “During the lockdown, we were desperately trying to get vaccinations done for all our inmates. But none of them had any legit ID cards at that time. That is when the then Raigad district collector, Nidhi Choudhari, personally took interest in our problem and issued Aadhaar cards for all of them,” said Samuel.
He added that using the Aadhaar cards, SEAL also managed to reunite 25 of the inmates with their families across India. As SEAL founder, Pastor K M Philip, said: “Our primary mission is to rescue homeless people from the streets and to try to reunite them with their family. We have also started the Rescunite Program (rescue-reunite) in this regard.”
One of the residents at the shelter, Ghanshyam Chavan, 68, happily held out his new ID card for this correspondent, and said: “I used to earlier stay at Lalbaug in central Mumbai, but lost my family and my money. I did odd jobs, and worked in the maintenance department of Cidco. Due to my advancing age, a kind lady brought me to SEAL Ashram. I will surely vote now on polling day.''
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreSome of the rescued inmates were confused as to whom to vote for as they do not follow politics at the home. A woman from Rajapur in Ratnagiri, Ashatai Mhatre (65), said: “I have lost contact with all my family members. I had nowhere to go, SEAL rescued me. I am happy to get my voter ID card.” When asked who she will vote for, she shrugged her shoulders. Since some of the homeless persons were also mentally disoriented at the time of their rescue, a question being raised is if they can properly follow the voting process on the EVMs. To this, Samuel said: “We will give them a basic tutorial on how to vote at the polling booth. Many of our inmates are keen learners, so I am certain that they will be able to vote.”