New Delhi: What began with throwing of ropes down a borewell late on Saturday night quickly escalated into a large-scale rescue operation involving multiple agencies, led by the Natioanl Disaster Response Force (NDRF). A parallel borewell excavation was initiated, besides several other complex processes. At first, the NDRF personnel employed a camera and ensured oxygen supply in the 1.5ft diameter, 35-to-40 feet deep borewell.The man, though dead, was retrieved by the afternoon from the same borewell in which he had fallen.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
At the break of dawn, the agencies mobilised heavy machinery, such as Poclain machines and JCB excavator, besides other tools, to dig a new borewell adjacent to the original one. The plan was to extract the person through this other borewell, a modus operandi deployed in similar incidents throughout the country.
According to Delhi Fire Services officers, they had received the rescue call at 1am on Sunday following which five fire tenders were rushed to the spot. “After initial attempts with ropes and J-hooks proved challenging due to poor visibility and the depth of the borewell, other teams were alerted to carry out the rescue,” said a senior fire officer. 
AKB Singh, Commandant 16 Battalion, NDRF, who led the exhaustive 14-hour operation, told TOI that they had received the distress call around 4am, following which their 40-member team left from Dwarka towards the spot. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo“Utilising an extendable camera wire, oxygen supply, ropes and other resources, the rescue team first observed the victim's distressing condition. His hands had been in the air while his face was in the water and he had been unresponsive”, Singh said.
He added that as they tried their best to entangle the victim’s hands with ropes and wires, the weight and position of the body posed significant challenges to extraction. “Had we applied more pressure in order to pull out the body, it would have led to its mutilation; this forced us to opt for a careful approach,” he said. Specialised equipment, such as Pendant Ludan and Umbrella Tool, were considered, but the presence of water in the borewell rendered them ineffective. Consequently, the decision was made to deploy JCBs for excavation.”
With calculated precision, parallel excavation began. Simultaneously, the preparation of cutting tools and welding machines was also made. “We crafted an iron ring, closely matching the size and circumference of the borewell entrance, leaving a mere one-inch gap. With precision, we lowered this customised ring into the borewell using a rope. Initially aiming for the victim's hands, we were fortunate to find that we had secured a grip on the entire shoulder clavicle. By carefully tightening the rope, we successfully lifted the man,” said an NDRF official. 
Meanwhile, the JCB had excavated approximately 25 feet of soil. “Initially, there was apprehension that the digging operation might stretch into the night, with uncertainty about when the retrieval process would conclude. However, our team swiftly responded and devised the customised ring, which proved to be effective in the rescue effort. The primary challenge lay in extracting a fully-grown adult through such a narrow aperture of barely one foot,” the commandant added.