NEW DELHI: Six newborns died after a massive fire broke out at New Born Baby Care Hospital in east Delhi's Vivek Vihar late on Saturday night. Five babies rescued from the fire are battling for their lives in another hospital. The hospital owner and the on-duty doctor have been booked for culpable homicide and other offences, cops said.
The fire department received a call around 11.30 pm and rushed to the spot.Witnesses said the hospital building turned into an inferno in just a few minutes and was followed by multiple blasts that possibly originated from the oxygen cylinders stored there. In all, around a dozen children were pulled out, but only five survived. 
The bodies will be handed over to the parents after DNA match confirms their identities, cops said. Police suspect a short circuit triggered the blaze.
"During inspection of hospital and examination of staff, it was found that there was no fire extinguisher, improper entry exit, absence of emergency exit, deployment of BAMS doctor etc. Therefore, more stringent sections were added to the FIR," DCP (Shahdara) Surender Chaudhary said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoIn all, there were seven deaths reported after the blaze. Confusion prevailed around the death of the seventh baby, who the hospital claimed had died at 9 pm, before the blaze started. Cops said they would verify this from the autopsy report. The post-mortem of the victims was conducted at GTB Hospital.
After receiving an SOS call, around 12 fire tenders, cops and crime & forensic experts rushed to the spot and began dousing and rescue operations. Witnesses recounted the terrifying ordeal, describing a series of explosions that rocked the area. They reported seeing oxygen cylinders propelled into the air as the fire raged out of control. They heard at least six to seven blasts.
Sarika Jain, a resident living in close proximity to the hospital, was about to enter her home when an explosion occurred. The force of the blast flung her several metres, leaving her with injuries. Similarly, there was a close escape for a woman and her two daughters who were living on the second floor of the building. They, however, lost their opticals shop in the incident.
Rajni Oberoi, who lives adjacent to the hospital, said: “Initially, we thought there was an issue with the transformer when the blasts began. I heard three consecutive explosions, and by the time we reached the road in front of the hospital, 8-9 blasts had already occurred. The impact was so intense that the AC unit in the adjacent building also caught fire.”
When cops started searching for the accused owner, they found him missing. His last location was traced to Jaipur. Raids were conducted and he was summoned to join the investigation. He appeared before police in the evening and was arrested.
Municipal Corporation of Delhi said in a statement: “The premises was found consisting of ground and first floor and was constructed in 2001-02 and the baby care hospital in this building has been in operation since 2015. This building was built under the sanctioned building plan. In this context, ‘Other Activities’ (including nursing/hospital activities) are allowed under Chapter 15.0 Mixed Use Regulations of Master Plan.