Agra: Lakshmi, the ‘skinniest elephant in the country’ when it was rescued from Madhya Pradesh in Dec 2021, is now on the verge of being declared overweight and put on a watch list to monitor her growing girth. Weighing 2,900kg upon rescue from a life where she was deployed for begging and commercial use, the 33-year-old pachyderm suffered from chronic arthritis and joint deformities.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoShe was tagged as the skinniest jumbo by People for Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) India which conducted a joint operation with animal rescue NGO, Wildlife SOS, to get her freed. Lakshmi found permanent rehabilitation at the Wildlife SOS Elephant Conservation and Care Centre (ECCC) in Mathura (UP).
In the two years since her rescue, Lakshmi has transformed, adding almost 240kg to her figure, and now weights 3,140kg. Dr Ilayaraja S, deputy director (veterinary services) at Wildlife SOS, said, “She was debilitated by chronic pain and suffering from long-term deprivation of food and water. With treatment and nutritious diet, she has overcome her condition.”
During rehabilitation, Lakshmi received specialised care, including a sandpit to alleviate arthritic pain, a mud pile for comfortable resting, and a bamboo stand for resting her head and trunk. She was provided with a customised jacket for warmth, daily grooming, and massage to improve blood circulation. Her diet includes 12kg of a variety of fruits, 120kg of fodder, 250 grams of ghee, 2kg porridge, 2kg peanuts and bowls full of pulses. She also gets supplementation of vitamins and minerals and liver tonic.
The flip side of her weight gain is that it is putting pressure on her lower body, which hasn’t healed from the scars of her past life. Ilayaraja said, “There is a deformity in her legs caused due to her exploitation for years. We are trying to keep her weight in check as any further increase may result in restricted mobility.”
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoLakshmi’s story resonates with another rescued elephant, Pari, who also suffered abuse and exploitation. Despite their painful pasts, the bond between the two blossomed at the centre, bringing comfort and healing to both. 
Kartick Satyanarayan, co-founder and CEO of Wildlife SOS, said, “The caregivers and vets regularly assess compatibility among elephants. After observing their interactions, they noticed signs of bonding as the elephants smelled each other through their trunks, leading to the decision to place them in adjacent enclosures.” 
Pari, with her energetic nature and robust health, assumed a dominant role in their friendship, ensuring Lakshmi’s comfort and well-being. In return, Lakshmi, being the elder, offered nurturing care and companionship to her newfound friend. Their bond has significantly reduced stereotypic behaviour and uplifted the spirits of the people tending to them, officials at the rescue centre said.