LUCKNOW: Hours after being rescued from the confinement of an ex-militant group by the Baghmara police of Meghalaya state, Lucknow native Akhilesh Singh Chauhan recalled the trauma he experienced while being held hostage in the dense jungle of the South Garo Hills for a ransom of Rs 50 lakh.
On the intervening night between Tuesday and Wednesday, around 1:40 am, the heavy-duty equipment mechanic from Lucknow was kidnapped by two gun-wielding men from the makeshift camp next to an under-construction Rongdik bridge on NH-217, within Siju police limits.Akhilesh (aged 50) was employed by a private company involved in bridge construction.
“In the wee hours of March 20, while I was asleep, someone kept knocking at the door of my makeshift camp. As soon as I opened the door, two men armed with country-made weapons pounced on me and dragged me toward a bike. In the dead of night, they took me into the jungle on the bike at gunpoint,” said Akhilesh, who originally hails from Dullahpur village in the Ghazipur district.
For the past three years, Akhilesh has been working in Meghalaya on various construction projects.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo“I tried to explain to the men that I’m a poor man, but they didn’t understand Hindi. They continued to hit me, tied my limbs next to a tree in the jungle. They gave me biscuits and water during my captivity and asked me to arrange a ransom of Rs 50 lakh with the help of my contractor,” said Akhilesh.
On Thursday late at night, the Baghmara district police, led by Superintendent of Police Shailendra Bamaniya, conducted a well-coordinated operation to rescue Akhilesh from the jungle and apprehended two men who were identified as ex-militants.
The accused were identified as Wilban M Sangma (aged 30) and Withmil S Marak (aged 29), and they were booked under IPC 364A (Kidnapping for ransom) by the Siju police.
Bamaniya said, “Akhilesh was abducted by an ex-militant group. We have apprehended two men and are searching for two more. During the rescue operation, Akhilesh's safety was paramount, therefore we first secured him and then proceeded to arrest the accused men involved in the crime.”
He added, “The group wanted to extort ransom from the construction company under the pretext of releasing Akhilesh. Two more accomplices of the apprehended duo were making ransom demands from some other place and are still at large. Our team is searching for these men.”
Meanwhile, on Friday morning, Akhilesh's wife Sheela Singh and their children met Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath at his residence.
"From the bottom of my heart, I'm thankful to CM Yogi Adityanath and the Meghalaya police for successfully rescuing my husband," said Sheela.
Sheela and her three children live in rented accommodation in Beniganj on Kursi Road in Lucknow.
Akhilesh is expected to return to Lucknow in the next couple of days to celebrate Holi with his family.