Pune: A 16-year-old girl drowned, while people from a nearby hutment rescued her three friends from a 15ft water pit in Tilekarnagar on Katraj-Kondhwa bypass around 11.30am on Saturday.
The police identified the deceased as Muskan Deva Silawat from Khargane in Madhya Pradesh. She currently resided in a hutment opposite the water body.
Leela Silawat, a relative of the victim, said,“We migrated from Madhya Pradesh to Pune around four months ago.We sell garments and kitchen knives to earn our bread and butter. The drowning incident is tragic and we want the police to take action against the person concerned for not covering the pit.” 
Kondhwa sub-fire station officer Sameer Shaikh said, “Rainwater had accumulated in the 50ftX50ft pit in front of Kalimata temple opposite Classic Residency. Four children residing in a hutment were washing clothes and playing when the footwear of Muskan fell into the pit. She drowned in the pit while trying to retrieve the footwear and raised an alarm. Her three friends jumped into the pit to save Muskan, but they also drowned.”
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreShaikh said residents of the area rescued Muskan’s friends — Sargam Jagdish Silawat (15), Janubai Ramesh Silawat (16) and Tejal Jagdish Silawat (12). They also retrieved Muskan and rushed her to a nearby private hospital, where she was declared dead on arrival.
Senior inspector Santosh Sonawane of the Kondhwa police said, “Muskan drowned because she had no knowledge that the pit was deep. Her three friends did not know how to swim, but jumped into the water to save her. They also drowned.”
He said, “A 10-year-old girl saw the incident. She went to the hutment and alerted her relatives Jagdish Silawat and Ramesh Silawat. The latter ran to the spot, jumped into the water and rescued the three girls. They later retrieved Muskan and rushed her to the hospital on finding her in an unconscious state.”
Sonawane said a complaint related to accidental death was registered under Section 174 of the Criminal Procedure Code. The victim’s body was sent to the Sassoon General Hospital for post-mortem. 
The police are conducting a probe to identify the person responsible for digging up the pit, he said. A riot control team was deployed at the spot to maintain the law and order situation because a large number of people gathered there from nearby localities, he said.
Former MLA Mahadeo Babar, present at the spot, said the pit was dug up by the civic body contractor to widen the Katraj-Kondhwa road by 48m but it was not barricaded or fenced to prevent accidents. No safety measure like installing warning sign boards or appointing security personnel was taken either, he said. The police should take stringent action against the contractor, he added.
Gajra Silawat, another relative of Muskan, said, “My relatives rescued Muskan’s friends. They sought help from the district administration because Muskan could not be traced initially. But they retrieved her from the other end of the pit before the district administration could swing into action.”