NEW DELHI: At least three people died and three were injured after a massive fire broke out at a four-storey residential building located in Krishna Nagar area of East Delhi late on Saturday night. 
Officials said the charred body of a 66-year-old woman identified as Parmila Shad was recovered from the first floor of the building, while two others identified as 18-year-old Keshav Sharma and 34-year-old Anju Sharma were declared brought dead by the doctors upon arrival at the hospital.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Chief of Delhi Fire Services Atul Garg said a call regarding a blaze at a house near the Bank of India, Krishna Nagar was received at 2.35 am.

"The flames were doused by 7.20 am and it was found that the fire began in 11 two wheelers in the stilt parking of the house and spread on the first floor. The building comprises ground (stilt) plus four floors," he said.
Officials said the second, third and fourth floors were affected by heat and smoke.
"One charred body was found on the first floor and 12 people were rescued from upper floors and sent to different hospitals," Garg said.
"A total of 13 people were rescued but three were declared dead," he said.
According to the DFS, two persons were declared dead at the GTB Hospital while one person was referred to Max hospital in a serious condition.
Fire officer Rajendra Atwal said, "Delhi Fire Service control room received a call at 2:35 am that here a fire broke out inside the house. A total of five fire brigade vehicles were rushed to the spot from our nearest stations and our officials began firefighting and rescue operations as well."
Atwal further added that, "There is only one exit here and that is the biggest problem in these buildings...people couldn't get out due to the heat and smoke...and shifted them to a hospital."
Upon receiving the information about the incident, firefighters from nearest stations Geeta colony and Laxmi Nagar promptly arrived at the scene. All injured persons were subsequently shifted to a nearby hospital. Seven people were rescued safely by the DFS unit.
This is the second major fire incident in Delhi within a span of two days. At least seven newborns died in a massive fire at a children's hospital in east Delhi's Vivek Vihar on Saturday night.