GURGAON/SONIPAT: Five including the company owners have been booked in the Sonipat factory boiler blast case, based on the complaint of the missing worker’s son. The blast that occurred Wednesday late night claimed the lives of two workers - Brajesh and Gulab Kurmi and one worker Sukhdev Pandit has been missing since. Several people - including workers and the locals - are undergoing treatment at different hospitals in Delhi and Sonipat.
A team of NDRF along with the firefighters and cops were deployed on the site on Thursday late evening.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe rescue work was halted at night after 9 pm, and was resumed Friday morning. The efforts to rescue Sukhdev are underway.
 Chandan Kumar, the son of Sukhdev Pandit, who is also feared to be trapped under the debris, has filed an FIR at the Kundli police station, accusing the factory owners and management of negligence.
According to the FIR, despite repeated complaints about a malfunctioning machine and the risk of a gas leak, the factory owners, Suresh Bansal, Sushil Bansal, Akshat Gupta, and contractor Sandeep, along with the unidentified factory manager, failed to address the issues, thereby endangering the lives of the workers. The workers were allegedly forced to work under these unsafe conditions, leading to the fatal accident.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreChandan Kumar, who has been a tenant near the Ram Mandir at Auchandi Border, Delhi, stated that his father had been working for Shree Ganesh Industries, the catechu company in Kundli - for about ten years. He reported that his father was told to work overtime on the night of the accident, and when he refused, he was threatened with dismissal.
“Upon receiving the news of the explosion and fire, I rushed to the factory site where I learnt about the casualties and the potential entrapment of my father. We kept trying his phone but it is still unreachable,” he said.
“We are five siblings including three unmarried sisters and all we have is our father. We don’t know what we are going to do without him. We need him back with us,” he added.
The local residents and other workers at the site were also affected by the incident, suffering injuries and damages to their properties. 
A case has been lodged under sections 304 (causing death by rash or negligent act), 34 (common intention), and 427 (mischief causing damage and loss) of the IPC at the Kundli police station. The authorities have been informed, and the NDRF team has been notified due to the possibility of more victims being trapped under the rubble. The FSL team has been dispatched to the site..