Chennai: Eight miles off the coast of the city, two people ‘fall’ off a ship. Two helicopters flew in and dropped rescue baskets. It was a search and rescue demo that was on, involving eight ships from the Indian Coast Guard on Sunday morning. The coast guard also displayed firefighting skills at sea. More than 2,000 people aboard the ship watched the exercise that was held as part of the three-day 48th Raising Day of the Indian Coast Guard.
The firefighting exercise engaged a lot more drama.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoOrange ‘smoke’ started to emerge from a smaller ship. An emergency message was sent alerting other ships that a ‘fire’ had broken out. A pollution control ship sailed in and started to pump in water through a cannon to douse the `fire’.
“The time taken to extinguish a fire depends on the type of cargo a merchant ship carries,” said ICG regional PRO Varun Augustya.
Not long after, two helicopters flew to the front of the ship and dropped a white parcel at a marked spot. “During the British era, when ships wanted to send secret messages to nearby vessels, they used to send them in these parcels,” said Agustya. However, now helicopters are also used for emergency lifting of injured people or survivors, he added.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoThe two-and-a-half hour drill which is part of an outreach programme by ICG was organised to give an opportunity for various organisations and people to witness the capabilities of the coast guard, said inspector general Donny Michael, commander coast guard region (East). 
Apart from vigilance, there are other fire and safety measures that are not known to most people, said DIG V K Vijay Kumar. “What different departments do on land as their duties, ICG does as one organisation,” he said. He mentioned that there are 12,000 people working for the ICG.