INDORE/BHOPAL: An Indore couple, who claimed to have rescued an abandoned newborn on a train, has been arrested, along with a relative, for kidnapping the two-month-old in his sleep when he was travelling with his parents.
Indore GRP station in charge Sanjay Shukla said on Friday, "Amar Singh Chouhan, his wife Indu Chouhan and Indu's sister Ranjana were arrested by Gwalior GRP on April 10 after interrogation.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThey were taken to Gwalior where the women were sent to jail while the man was taken on police remand." Chouhan works as a sports teacher at a top management institute and his sister-in-law works with railways.
The parents, Umesh and Sukhwanti Ahirwar, were reunited with their son, Naman, on Friday evening.
According to police, Amar and Indu have a daughter but always wanted a boy, and they couldn't resist the temptation when they saw the little one asleep and took him home. Then, fearing arrest, they handed the baby to Indore GRP, saying they found him.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreThe incident occurred aboard the Malwa Express on the night of April 5-6 when Umesh and Sukhwanti, residents of MP's Chhatarpur, were returning from Vaishno Devi with their newborn. Amar and wife Indu were in the same coach, travelling from Mathura to Indore without reservation, say police.
Just after the train left Mathura, Umesh went to sleep on berth 14 while his wife and child shared berth 13 in S2 coach. They woke up around 2.30am, when the train pulled into Dabra, and found the baby missing. Pandemonium broke out. The parents ran through the train looking for Naman in the wee hours. Railway police were informed and a case of kidnapping was registered with Gwalior GRP on April 7. On April 8, Amar approached Indore GRP, claiming that they had found a baby abandoned on an upper berth while travelling to Indore.
Shukla circulated pictures of the baby on social media and alerted other GRP units. "We found that Gwalior GRP had registered a case of abduction and it was clear that Amar and his family members were lying. A team from Gwalior arrived in Indore and interrogated them," said Shukla. Sources say Gwalior police scanned CCTV footage, checked their call details and found that the couple was lying. During questioning, Amar and Indu admitted to taking away the baby boy as they were always very concerned that they didn't have a son to "carry on the family lineage", say Gwalior police. 
"The accused said that they alighted from the train with the baby at Lalitpur station and took a bus and a taxi to reach Indore (315km away). But back home, when they interacted with other family members, they realized their mistake and hatched a plan to make it look like they had rescued the baby," said Shukla. Police found footage of them at Lalitpur station. TNN