Nagpur: From scorching heat for days to thunderstorm and heavy rain in intervals, the city’s weather is oscillating between extreme scenarios this summer. 
The situation can turn precarious, especially for homeless citizens. So, the Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC), along with help of the social service branch (SSB) of city police, is proactively rescuing homeless citizens from streets and relocating them to shelter homes to protect them from heat stroke as well as rains. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo

As per data received from NMC, between April 5 and May 11, its teams have rescued 77 homeless citizens and shifted them to shelter homes as part of the civic body’s heat action plan. The drive is being led by NMC social development department under the guidance of deputy commissioner Ranjana Lade. The department, under the Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana-National Urban Livelihoods Mission, is carrying out searches to locate homeless people. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoLade told TOI that it is a tough job as many a time homeless citizens run away after seeing officials. “Such drives are carried out throughout the year, but special focus is during summers when some might suffer from heat stroke. The number of homeless people in the city is increasing, so we are trying to accommodate as many as possible in the shelter homes,” Lade said. 
NMC runs five homeless shelter homes and one beggar home with combined capacity of 400. Currently, 349 people have been lodged in these homes. 
On facilities being provided at these shelter homes, the official said they are equipped with air coolers to provide the inmates respite from heat. “It is a tough job to manage these people, but we provide them with food and clothes, identify their skills and help them get work. Most of them have health and addiction issues, so we also provide them with medical assistance as well as counselling,” Lade said. 
Between April and May, NMC was successful in reuniting 30 of the inmates with their families, securing work for 11 and sending 10 of them to old-age homes. 
As per Lade, rescuing homeless people from Meetha Neem dargah area is the most challenging task as whenever a drive is carried out, they flee the spot only to come back later. “As people distribute food and blankets to them at the spot, homeless people consider it as a safe haven and are reluctant to move to a shelter home. On several occasions, we requested people to donate blankets or other clothes to shelter homes instead of giving them away on streets. In fact, citizens should inform us if they find homeless people on streets in need of help,” said Lade. 
Citizens seeking help for the homeless can contact on 8080143873, 9960183143 and 9960327532.