Pariva Pranati, who is currently seen playing the lead role in Wagle Ki Duniya, is an animal lover and on National Pet Day, the actress shares stories of rescuing animals over the years. She says she imbibed these qualities from her mother, who used to rescue not just dogs and cats, but also birds.
Currently the actress’ two-bedroom apartment in Kandivali houses four cats and three dogs.PollBigg Boss OTT 3: Payal Malik gets eliminated; was it fair?NoYesPariva’s first pet, Frodo, was gifted to her by her actor-photographer husband Puneet Sachdev. Additionally, she has two rescued Indies - Britney and Bhoori, and four rescued cats – Orange, Robin, Champi and Psycho.

Pariva says, “Puneet and I often talk about how our house is turning into an animal shelter, but whenever I see an animal in distress, I feel it’s my duty to bring it home. After that, I don’t have the heart to give them away. On a serious note, I do want to start an animal shelter someday. I have resolved that a part of my earnings will be reserved for my pets and animals.”
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoRecounting how she had rescued her cats, she says, “Orange was wounded when I found her and Robin was wandering around our building when my husband brought her home. Champi was spotted on the set, a bike had run over her, so I decided to take care of her. And now, I also have Psycho, whose mother was run over by a car. I have come across many animals who have been abandoned and injured in the worst way. I think we all need to do our bit and ensure that even strays get a good life.”
Pariva admits how it is hard work around her pets but she does not see it as a burden. She said, “Sterilisation of animals is important but at the same time, feeding them is important too. Other living beings have equal rights to live on this planet as human beings. It is time we realise how they love us unconditionally, more than humans do.” She added, “I remember once when my son was just a few months old and almost falling off the bed, my pet stood near the bed so that he would not fall off. These are little things that reinforce the thought how animals need kindness!”
Pariva, who has been part of TV shows like Hamari Sister Didi and Laut Aao Trisha, dreams of having her own animal shelter house. She said, “I want to start an animal shelter someday. As of now, I have resolved that a part of my earnings will be reserved for my pets and animals who I regularly feed, but someday, I hope that I can start an animal shelter where all animals can be rescued and they can lead happier lives, too, instead of living on the streets.”
Wagle Ki Duniya's Sumeet Raghavan: My most favourite thing about Gudi Padwa is shrikhand puri