NEW DELHI: The Israeli Foreign Ministry reported the successful rescue of four hostages from Hamas captivity in Gaza during an operation in Nuseirat on Saturday. The hostages, identified as Noa Argam (25), Almog Meir Jan (21), Andrey Kozlov (27), and Shlomi Ziv (40), were abducted by Hamas at the 'Nova' music festival on October 7.
In a post on X, the Israel Defence Forces posted a video footage capturing the rescue operation that secured the freedom of three out of four hostages.

"One of the first moments when Shlomi, Andrey and Almog board the “Yasur” helicopter after being rescued from Hamas after 245 days as hostages," the IDF wrote on X.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndo
Another post on X said, "EXCLUSIVE FOOTAGE from the helicopter that brought Noa back home from Hamas captivity."
In a separate video posted on X, the hostages can be seen boarding the helicopter, accompanied by the officers. "This is the moment the elite Yamam unit rescued former hostages Shlomi Ziv, Almog Meir Jan and Andrey Kozlov from captivity in Gaza. Real life superheroes." the video clip said.

The recently unveiled footage shows the Israeli military and police personnel making their way into the apartment where Hamas militants in Gaza had taken three individuals captive.
Earlier in a joint statement from the Israel Defence Forces, Israel security agency, and the Israel police, the authorities said that the rescue was carried out in a "complex special operation" in the central Gaza Strip. 
The statement said, "This morning (Saturday), in a joint IDF, ISA and Israel Police (Yamam) complex special daytime operation in Nuseirat, four Israeli hostages were rescued. Noa Argam(25), Almog Meir Jan (21), Andrey Kozlov (27), and Shlomi Ziv (40), were kidnapped by the Hamas terrorist organization from the 'Nova' music festival on October 7th.
"The hostages were rescued by the IDF, ISA and 'Yamam' forces from two separate locations in the heart of Nuseirat," it added.
According to the Health Ministry in Gaza, at least 36,801 Palestinians have been killed and 83,680 wounded by Israel's military offensive on Gaza since October 7.