MUMBAI: Over 60 hours after a hoarding collapsed on a petrol pump in Ghatkopar, BMC commissioner Bhushan Gagrani announced on Thursday morning that the search and rescue operation had been called off. The toll stood at 16, with over 75 injured. In all, 71 mangled vehicles were retrieved from the wreckage.
Gagrani, who inspected the crash site early in the day, said the removal of debris would continue, following which the site would be sealed for investigation by a technical team.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Amid BMC and GRP deflecting blame over the size of and permissions for the fatal hoarding—the land belongs to the state and does not come under BMC’s jurisdiction—Gagrani told reporters that there is a need to adhere to the specified guidelines for advertisement hoardings, regardless of jurisdiction. “All hoardings in the city need to ensure compliance with size, foundation, and wind velocity regulations specified by the civic body. Additionally, BMC has mandated a structural stability audit for hoardings with issued permissions, and directed the railways to follow suit,” he said. BMC has capped the size of hoardings at 40x40sqft, but the one that crashed was 120x120sqft.
Gagrani said the process of debris removal has been slow owing to the presence of the fuel reserve at the petrol pump. Fears of fire outbreaks due to the presence of fuel in the trapped cars, too, made the rescuers move gingerly.
With the rescue operation called off, an NDRF personnel said the two teams from the agency that had been deputed to the site had been withdrawn.
When TOI visited the site, fire brigade and debris removal teams were clearing the rubble, while other workers were dismantling hoardings in the vicinity. Officials at the site said they expected the debris to be cleared out in another day. After BPCL cleared the use of gas cutters, workers were using the equipment to speed up the process of clearing the rubble. Civic officials said MMRDA authorities provided prompt help following the tragedy by providing two specialised cranes to lift the wreckage at the site weighing several metric tonnes.
Of the 71 vehicles pulled out of the wreckage, 31 are four-wheelers, 30 two-wheelers, eight autorickshaws and the remaining are trucks. According to BMC officials, a majority of the four-wheelers appeared to be tour and travel vehicles and taxis. Most of these vehicles were mangled. An official said some of the two-wheelers’ riders had taken shelter from the sudden rain and dust storm at the petrol pump on Monday evening. “We have asked our ward staff to carry out a survey of the vehicles and bifurcate them according to different categories. This will take time. We have told BPCL to clear the site as our job has been completed,” said a BMC official. 
Meanwhile, following BMC’s request, Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute has appointed a team to look into the technical cause of the crash. Gagrani said that a report from the institute, whose members have already inspected the site, is expected in a week.