GURGAON: On Saturday evening at 7 pm, the rear wall of the Rambagh crematorium in Madanpuri area of the city collapsed, tragically claiming the lives of five people, including two young girls. The incident occurred around 6:20 pm when six individuals were sitting by the wall, smoking hookahs, and the wall suddenly collapsed on them. The two girls who were playing nearby also became trapped under the debris.
The deceased have been identified as Manoj Gaba (54), Devidayal alias Pappu (70), Krishna Kumar alias Baba DJ (52), Tanya (11), and Khushboo (10).PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoAn elderly person, identified as 50-year-old Deepe Pradhan, is currently in critical condition and undergoing treatment at the Government Hospital in Sector 10. Tanya was a resident of Veer Nagar, while the others were residents of Arjun Nagar.
The mother of Tanya, one of the deceased girls, expressed her grief and frustration, stating, "We had asked the manager of the crematorium to get the wall repaired several times but our pleas fell on deaf ears. My daughter was walking with her friend by the side of the wall when it fell off." 
She further added, "The wall was strong enough and for about 2 months we have been fearing for our lives, requesting the manager to get it repaired. The logs of wood would lean on the wall. The weight had weakened the wall and it was leaning outside the perimeter of the crematorium. The wall would shake with the slightest of movement, even if there would be a speeding vehicle passing by."
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreSHO New Colony Avtar Singh commented on the poor construction of the wall, saying, "The wall was a government property and there were no beams, pillars or columns in the wall. The construction of the wall was poor due to negligence of several parties involved."
DCP West Karan Goyal assured that the incident would be investigated and a case would be filed against the cremation ground management based on the complaint.
Locals living in the colony behind the Rambagh cremation ground in Madanpuri also expressed their concerns about the weak walls, which they had been noticing for about two months. They mentioned that there was no strong foundation to the wall. The rescue efforts were further complicated by the logs of wood that fell on the victims when the wall collapsed. Cranes were brought in to remove the debris and the logs of wood.
The injured were taken to various hospitals for treatment, with Devidayal, Manoj, Krishna Kumar, and Deepa Pradhan being taken to Sethi Hospital, Tanya to Medanta, and Khushboo to Civil Hospital. Unfortunately, Devidayal, Manoj, Krishna, Tanya, and Khushboo succumbed to their injuries during treatment. Deepa Pradhan has now been referred to Artemis Hospital for further care.