NEW DELHI: The Sealdah-bound Kanchanjunga Express (13174) collided with a goods train on Monday morning near New Jalpaiguri. The accident occurred around 9 am near Rangapani, close to the New Jalpaiguri station.
The divisional railway manager of NFR's Katihar Division reported unconfirmed injuries due to the accident.
What we know so far:In the collision, at least 9 passengers have been killed, while over 60 are injured.More people are feared dead and many passengers have sustained injuries in the accident.The collision occurred reportedly after the train "overshooted" signal and hit a rear portion of the Kanchanjunga train, resulting in the derailment of wagons of the goods train. A railway source said signal had been defective since 5:50 am.Four coaches of the Kanchanjunga Express and five coaches of the goods train have been damaged as per the NFR Railway.Jaya Varma Sinha, chairman & CEO Railway board said the first indication suggest "case of signal disregard"."Prima facie suggests human error as the cause. The first indications suggest that this is a case of signal disregard. Kavach needs to proliferated, planned for West Bengal," she said.Chief minister Mamata Banerjee said the rescue teams have rushed to the spot.Mamata Banerjee said DM, SP, doctors, ambulances and disaster teams have been rushed to the site for rescue," She said.Mamata Banerjee will also visit the accident site to take stock of relief operations.Union Railway minister Ashwini Vaishnaw said rescue operations are going on at "war footing" and Railways, NDRF and SDRF are working in close coordination. He said the injured are being shifted to the hospital and senior officials have reached the site.Ashwini Vaishnaw has left for Darjeeling to visit the accident site.Prime Minister Narendra Modi has expressed condolences to those who lost their loved ones and said rescue operation are under way."The railway accident in West Bengal is saddening. Condolences to those who lost their loved ones. I pray that the injured recover at the earliest. Spoke to officials and took stock of the situation. Rescue operations are underway to assist the affected. The Railways Minister Shri AshwiniVaishnaw Ji is on the way to the site of the mishap as well," PM Modi wrote on X.PM Modi also announced an ex-gratia amount of Rs 2 lakh from PMNRF to the next of kin of each deceased and Rs 50,000 to each injured in the accident.Ashwinin Vaishnaw said enchanced ex-gratia compensation will be provided to the victims -- Rs 10 lakh in case of death and Rs 2.5 lakh towards grievous and Rs 50,000 for minor injuries.Railway minister Ashwini Vaishnaw visited the site of the train collision at Rangapani near New Jalpaiguri station in West Bengal to assess the situation firsthand. Due to the narrow road, Ashwini traveled on the pillion of a motorbike for part of the journey to reach the accident site. Sealdah helpline number 
033-23508794033-23833326Guwahati helpline number
036127316210361273162203612731623