NEW DELHI: At least 60 Indians, who the Indian embassy rescued after fraudulently being taken to Cambodia and forced into cyber fraud by trafficking rackets, have finally returned to their home. 
Taking to X, previously known as Twitter, the Indian embassy said, "Always committed to helping Indians abroad. First batch of 60 Indian nationals rescued by Indian Embassy in Cambodia from fraudulent employers return home.Thank the Cambodian authorities for their support. "

Earlier Indian embassy informed that they have 60 Indians in cooperation with Sihanoukville(SHV)authority and they are assisting with travel documents & other arrangements for their early return home.


Indians were lured by promising them jobs with big money but once they land in the alien country, they are forced to work in cybercrime syndicates. Looking at the job scam, Indian embassy opened a temporary control room at Sihanoukville, where many Indian nationals, including several from Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, have been held captive and forced to work in cybercrime syndicates. A team of officials from the embassy has also been sent there to assist them and help in their repatriation.
The embassy said in a statement that the matter has been taken up with Cambodian authorities at the highest level for immediate repatriation of Indian nationals who wish to return. So far, nearly 360 Indian nationals ‘trapped’ in the scam centres in the Southeast Asian country have been rescued and repatriated, including about 60 who were rescued on May 20, it said.
Few days back, ministry of external affairs (MEA) issued an advisory for Indian nationals travelling to Laos and Cambodia in search of employment to be cautious of scams.
The ministry said that these fake agents are luring people for employment. "All Indian nationals who are traveling for jobs in Cambodia and the Southeast Asian region, are advised that there are many fake agents operating in the region, who along with agents in India, are luring people to scam companies, involved especially in cyber crimes.
Anybody who takes up a job in Cambodia should do so only through authorised agents approved by the Ministry of External Affairs of India," the ministry said in the statement.