NAVI MUMBAI: During a police raid on Friday, eight dogs were found housed in deplorable conditions at a dump yard used as an illegal boarding facility. Mumbai police, assisted by representatives of People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) India, seized and rescued the animals, who apparently had been rented out to companies as “guard” dogs.
Some dogs were found confined to kennels in a closed area with no ventilation and others were kept on short ropes.They were living in unsanitary conditions without adequate food or water. Additionally, nobody, not even the owner, was present to watch the animals, which could have led to an untoward incident occurring.
The rescued dogs have been transferred to Kalote Animal Trust in Raigad district and Citizens for Animal Protection Foundation in Thane, to be rehabilitated.
PETA India submitted a formal complaint with Navghar Police Station against the owner of the facility for inflicting cruelty to animals by keeping the dogs tethered around the clock and failing to provide basic food, shelter, and sanitation. After being warned about the legal consequences of treating animals cruelly, the owner voluntarily surrendered the dogs to PETA India so that they could receive veterinary care before being rehabilitated.
“PETA India commends the work of the Mumbai police for sending a clear message that cruelty to animals will not be tolerated,” said PETA India Cruelty Response Coordinator Saloni Sakaria. “The mental trauma and physical torture these dogs must have endured is hard to imagine,” she added.
There is no need to use canines as “guard” dogs due to advances in surveillance technology and security systems, added a PETA India representative. Dogs used for guarding are often subjected to neglect and abuse. They may be left alone for long periods, kept on short ropes, and confined to small, poorly ventilated spaces. “Guard” dogs often do not receive adequate training, leading to behavioural issues. They may also be deprived of proper veterinary care, adequate food, and socialization. Dogs are companions, not security devices, and deserve to live in homes with loving families.
PETA India – whose motto reads, in part, that “animals are not ours to abuse in any way” – opposes speciesism, a human-supremacist worldview.