PANAJI: The state is currently facing serious problems related to stray dogs with a series of dog bite cases being reported. 
Govt's "The Goa Small Animal Rescue Management Scheme 2014 (Amended)" is designed to scientifically manage and control the population of stray dogs. However, the scheme has not received a very enthusiastic response from local bodies. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
The department of animal husbandry and veterinary services (AHVS) said that only 51 urban and rural local bodies are availing the scheme.

    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoAs per govt data, of the total 191 village panchayats in the state, only 43 are currently benefiting from this scheme. Additionally among the 14 urban local bodies, only eight, including the Corporation of the City of Panaji (CCP) have shown interest in taking advantage of the scheme.
The 20th livestock census reveals that there are a total of 1,14,840 dogs in Goa. Of these, 86,976 are pet dogs while 27,864 are stray dogs. As per the data placed before the state assembly nearly 12,000 dogs are sterilised as part of the said scheme via animal birth control initiatives in the last four years. 
A senior official at AHVS said that the management of stray dogs and implementation of animal birth control is the responsibility of panchayats and municipalities. He said that the department does not conduct sterilisation or neutering of stray dogs but only provides grant-in-aid to local bodies. “We just act as facilitators and have therefore introduced the scheme. 
Local bodies are required to sign a memorandum of understanding with NGOs and execute the scheme, with financial assistance provided by the animal husbandry department. Due to only 51 local bodies taking advantage of the scheme, there has been an increase in the population of stray dogs in many areas,” he said. Minister for animal husbandry Nilkanth Harlankar stated that govt is prepared to offer necessary support to NGOs and local bodies. He urged them to take advantage of the scheme. 
“The public should not blame the department for the issue of stray dogs. We are carrying out our duties and encouraging local bodies and NGOs to do the same. They should show interest and come forward. If there is a delay or failure in paying their bills, they have the right to ask us questions. 
We are distributing the funds promptly,” he said. The department said that it undertakes awareness programmes regularly through Mission Rabies to help people understand dog psychology and behaviour and reduce dog bites. An official at the directorate of panchayats said that the low response to the scheme might be due to the lack of awareness among the elected representatives of the local bodies.