BUDAUN: Defence minister Rajnath Singh on Wednesday claimed that the Narendra Modi govt stopped the Russia-Ukraine war for four and a half hours to safely evacuate the Indian students trapped there. Singh made the remark while addressing a public meeting in support of BJP candidates Dharmendra Kashyap and Durvijay Singh. While Kashyap is contesting from Aonla Lok Sabha seat, Durvijay Singh is a contender from Budaun.
Claiming a new India has emerged over the last 10 years of the leadership of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Singh said that when India says something, the whole world listens carefully.
Videos03:33NDA's Maharashtra Partners Upset With MoS Post In Modi 3.06 days ago03:02Modi 3.0 Cabinet Portfolios Out: Home, Defence, Finance, Foreign Affairs With BJP6 days ago03:41Narendra Modi Takes Oath As India's Prime Minister For Historic Third Consecutive Term7 days ago06:29'Failed To Cross 100...': Modi Mocks 'Loser' INDIA Bloc At Mega NDA Meeting9 days ago04:55'Congress Back To Old Ways': Next Move After Lok Sabha Election Result Decoded | Watch9 days ago04:41UCC, Farm Laws & More: Key Decisions By PM Modi In NDA 3.0 | 'Allies To Dictate Terms'9 days ago03:49'BJP Lost U.P. Due To Non-Performing MPs' Biggest Biggest Poll Debacle | Watch9 days ago03:06Khalistan Protesters In Canada Stun With New Indira Gandhi Assassination Float; India Fumes9 days ago04:28PM Modi Bows To Constitution, Bonds With Naidu & Nitish As TDP, JDU Eye Big Posts In NDA 3.09 days ago09:14Modi's Big 'Stability' Assurance With 'Samarthan'; Calls NDA 'Most Successful Alliance In History'9 days ago123456"The Russia-Ukraine war has been on for two years. When it started, thousands of our children were studying in Ukraine. A delegation of parents of children stranded in Ukraine PM met Narendra Modi and asked to bring back his children safely. Then the PM of India spoke to the Presidents of Russia and Ukraine and the war stopped for four and a half hours. This is today's India," he said. The minister further attacking the opposition said, "In the coming years, when people ask children about SP, they will be able to say it's a defunct party."