NOIDA/GURGAON: A businessman abducted from Faridabad was rescued after a chase by police on the Noida-Greater Noida Expressway early on Tuesday. 
The car in which Rajiv Mittal (45), a Ballabgarh-based contractor, was being taken crashed into a divider near Knowledge Park during the chase. While cops rescued Mittal, his four kidnappers managed to flee.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo

"He was kidnapped by four men in a Mahindra Scorpio. They kept driving around before reaching Greater Noida, and were possibly trying to go to Delhi," said Ashok Kumar Sharma, additional DCP (Greater Noida). 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreA team from Knowledge Park police station was on regular patrol when they noticed something was amiss about the Scorpio passing by. 
"When an attempt was made to stop the car, they started driving the vehicle at a high speed. Police chased them and the car ended up hitting a divider. The four men got off the Scorpio and fled," a police spokesperson said. 
The police team spotted Mittal inside, with his hands tied up, and injuries on his body. He was taken to a nearby hospital, where he was treated for minor injuries and discharged by the evening. 
Greater Noida police said they alerted their counterparts in Faridabad, where Mittal filed a complaint. 
The businessman told cops that he was abducted in Sector 11 of Faridabad when he was waiting near a petrol pump to pick up his daughter, who had landed at IGI airport in Delhi and was returning home with a friend after their Chennai college closed for vacations. 
Around 1.20am, someone in a two-wheeler deliberately crashed into his parked Mahindra Scorpio. As he got out to assess the damage, four men surrounded him and overpowered him. They covered his face, tied up his hands and forced him to sit in the rear seat of the car. 
"As soon as I got down from the car, four people came from behind the car and caught me. Meanwhile, the person riding the scooter ran away. He also had a partner. They caught me at gunpoint, tied up my mouth, covered my face, and made me lie down on the footrest of the middle seat of my Scorpio car," the complaint read. 
The men stole Rs 2,500 from his wallet and two ATM cards. Mittal said in his complaint that they appeared to be drunk and kept assaulting him. They repeatedly demanded that he give them the PIN for his ATM cards, but he misled them by giving incorrect information. 
The men, the businessman alleged, threatened to kill him and referred to one of their group as "Mohit". 
Faridabad police said they have registered a case under sections 365 (abduction), 379B (to commit snatching, causes hurt and/or wrongfully restrains someone), 506 (criminal intimidation) and 34 (common intention) of the IPC, along with provisions of the Arms Act.