MAHENDRAGARH: Students and staff of a private school were the first responders at the accident site here Thursday morning, helping save several lives by extricating injured children from the overturned school bus and ensuring they made it to hospital in time. The bus was taking 37 students to GL Public School when it crashed into a tree at a bend, with its driver, allegedly drunk, losing control.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoSix students died. The toll could have been higher but for the quick response from Euro International School, which is near the spot. 
Euro principal Sunil Kumar said, "Our transport in-charge was outside and saw it. He alerted others. He also phoned me. We rushed to the spot, staffers and some students," he said. 
Along with some locals, they managed to push the bus, which had fallen on its side, back up and drag some trapped students out.
Kumar was full of regret about not being able to save three students who were crushed to death under the bus. The transport in-charge, Sunil, said, "I was just entering the school when I saw the bus. In no time, it crashed into the tree. I ran towards it, shouting. The window panes shattered. Such was the impact that kids were thrown out."
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreKumar called police while passersby chased Dharmendra, the driver of bus, who had jumped out and managed to run a few hundred metres before he was caught. "We had enough buses and drivers to transport the kids to hospital. Though one bus was enough to carry them all to hospital, we could not waste time. We started sending them to the nearest health facility - the community health centre (CHC) in Kanina, about 2km away - as soon as they were pulled out in batches while we continued the rescue. Three buses were sent with injured students," Kumar said.
"When we were assured that there were no more students stuck inside, we went to the CHC to check on the children. We found out that four of them had died. Ambulances too then started reaching the CHC and the rest of the students were transferred to private hospitals in Rewari," he added. Mansi, one of the students in the bus who lost her cousin in the accident, said: "My cousin was holding my hand when he died. His eyes were pleading with me to save him. I could do nothing. But the staff and students of Euro helped me save my brother Priyanshu. Had they not come in time, I don't know what would have happened." Satish Kumar, an officer from Kanina police station, said, "By the time we arrived, the bus was already upright. The people from Euro School left no stone unturned in saving as many lives as possible. Lifting such a heavy bus with so many students inside is not an easy task. But they did it."