PATNA: A boat carrying 17 passengers, mostly from the same family, capsized in the Ganga river near Umanath ganga ghat in Barh sub-division of Patna district on Sunday morning at around 9.15 am. While 13 people have been rescued, with some managing to swim to safety and reach the shore, 4 people are still missing.
The individuals feared drowned in Barh were identified as retired NHAI officer Avdhesh Kumar (60), his brother-in-law Hardev Prasad (65), Nitish Kumar (30) and Manju Devi (45).Among the rescued was Avdhesh's nephew, Alok Kumar, a technician at Steel Authority of India Limited, IISCO Steel Plant, Asansol. Alok said that out of the 17 people on the boat, eight were members of his family.
According to Aparajit Lohan, the Barh subdivisional police officer (SDPO), the incident took place at approximately 9am near Umanath Ganga ghat. The boat, which was overloaded with 17 passengers, overturned and sank in the middle of the river.
The family, hailing from Malti village in Nalanda district, had come to take a holy bath in the river. Due to the crowded conditions at the ghat and the shallow water level, they decided to hire a boat to carry out their rituals. As they were returning, their boat overturned, causing all of them to struggle in the water.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo"So far, 13 people have been rescued, including those who managed to swim to the banks. Rescue operation is still on to trace the four missing persons," Patna district administration said in a statement.

"The mishap took place at around 9.15 am near Umanath ganga ghat when the boat carrying 17 people, mostly belonging to a family, overturned midway. The boat overturned and sank in the middle of the Ganga river. While 11 people have been rescued so far. Some of them managed to swim to safety and reach the shore of the river, six are still missing," said Shubham Kumar, Sub-Divisional Magistrate (Barh).
Following the incident, district administration officials and police personnel promptly arrived at the scene. They began rescue operations with the help of local residents to find the missing passengers.
Meanwhile, Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar has instructed officials to intensify their search operations to trace the missing persons.
According to a statement by the CMO, "The CM has categorically instructed officials to continue search operations till the missing persons are found".