NEW DELHI: A stone quarry collapsed on the southern outskirts of Aizawl amid heavy rainfall on Tuesday morning, killing sixteen workers while 17 are reported missing in three locations. 
The incident occurred at approximately 6 am in an area situated between Melthum and Hlimen. More than 100 people from 32 families have been moved to safer areas in Sairang village near Aizawl.
Authorities said that the rescue operation is underway to locate those trapped beneath the debris, but the persistent rains are hindering the operation.The heavy rainfall has also caused landslides in various parts of the state, as reported by officials.
"Police personnel are engaged in rescue operations. The water levels of rivers are also rising up and many people living in the riverside areas have been evacuated," said Mizoram DGP Anil Shukla.
A landslide on National Highway 6 at Hunthar has cut off the Mizoram's capital. Additionally, several intra-state highways have been affected by landslides.
The state government has announced a relief fund of Rs 15 crore for all those affected by Cyclone Remal and ex-gratia of Rs 4 lakhs to relatives of deceased.
Additionally, authorities announced that all school and government offices were closed on May 28. 
"In view of the inclement weather and the warning issued by the Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) on "Cyclone Remal", the State Government hereby orders closure of all Government offices today i.e., 28th May, 2024 (Tuesday) with the exception of offices rendering essential services such as Disaster Management and Rehabilitation, District Administration, Health and Family Welfare, Mizoram Police, Power and Electricity, Public Health Engineering, etc. Secretaries and Heads of Departments shall ensure that Officers and staff of their respective departments shall "work from home" on this day and be available in case of any exigencies," said government in a press release.
 This measure aims to ensure the safety of government employees while maintaining the continuity of essential services during the cyclone.
The Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) has issued warnings of strong winds across various regions, with wind speeds ranging from 40-50 kmph to 35-45 kmph. The adverse weather conditions are expected to persist until the evening of May 28, 2024, emphasizing the need for heightened caution and readiness among the population.
"Squally wind speed reaching 40-50 kmph gusting to 60 kmph is likely over South. Assam and Meghalaya, Mizoram, Tripura and 35-45 kmph gusting to 55 kmph is likely over Nagaland, Manipur and remaining parts of Assam till afternoon noon of 28th and thereafter very likely to decrease and becoming 35-45 kmph gusting to 55 kmph over Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram & Tripura till 28th May evening," said IMD.
Meanwhile, Haflong-Silchar link road in Assam has been cut off as a portion it has been washed away due to rising river waters.
Simanta Kumar Das, deputy commissioner of Dima Hasao district said that one person died and 17 injured due to strong winds and heavy rain in the state.