GHAZIABAD: A teenager reported missing from West Bengal this Feb and her rescue two months later led to a raid that on Tuesday found more than 50 minors, the youngest just 8 years old, working at the abattoir of a meat processor and exporter in the city. 
In a joint operation by police, non-profit Mission Mukti Foundation and officials of National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR), 55 minors were rescued from the factory of International Agro Foods in Dasna.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe team found minors slicing meat or involved in packaging and weighing processes. 
Investigators suspect the minors, including 31 girls, were trafficked from several districts of UP, Bihar and West Bengal. After their rescue, the children told officials they belong to poor families and were brought to NCR by “contractors” who promised them stable salaries and a place to live. 
Additional DCP (crime) Sachidanand said on Wednesday that Ghaziabad cops received a letter from UP Police headquarters in Lucknow about a tip-off to NCPCR that children were employed at a slaughterhouse in Dasna.
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreA month before, on April 24, Mission Mukti Foundation had rescued a 17-year-old girl, who was found working at the same factory. 
“We rescued her after work hours. She told us that there were other children working at the factory and all of them wanted to go back home. While she went back to her family in West Bengal, we confirmed the information and alerted NCPCR,” said Veerendra Kumar Singh, director of Mission Mukti Foundation. 
After the input, Ghaziabad police formed a team of Crime Branch, anti-trafficking personnel, NCPCR and Mission Mukti Foundation.
“We suspected that the children were forced to work in inhuman conditions and faced serious health hazards. The raid began around noon,” Sachidanand said.
Singh said the team was initially stopped from entering the factory. “Cops forcefully made their way inside. Initially, we found 20 children as the staff was trying to hide the others. It took four hours to rescue all 55 children,” he added. 
Among the minors rescued is a 14-year-old boy from Bihar, who told the team he was brought to Ghaziabad by a person known to his family. The boy’s mother died of Covid-19 in 2022, and his father is a daily wage earner.
“My family needed money for my sister's marriage. So, the contractor brought me here six months ago and promised that I will get Rs 10,000 per month along with a room to stay and food. All my earnings were received by the contractor, who said he will send it to my father,” the boy told the team.
Another 17-year-old girl rescued on Tuesday said she belonged to UP’s Shamli. She was brought to the city three months ago and promised a monthly salary of Rs 11,000.
Ghaziabad labour enforcement officer Rupali said all 55 minors will be shifted to shelter homes after a medical examination and meeting with child welfare committee (CWC) officials. 
The labour department will submit a report to the chief judicial magistrate to take strict action against the company, she added.
Payal Sharma of NCPCR said the panel will write to concerned authorities to take action against International Agro Foods. “We will also request them to cancel the company’s licence,” Sharma said. Police offciers said the process to register an FIR was ongoing. They said the company got the licence to operate in Dec 2022 and it was valid till 2025-end.
Company officials could not be reached for comment till Wednesday evening.