MUMBAI: A cat, with four newborn kittens, had a miraculous escape as the family was spotted and finally rescued from the engine cavity under a car's hood only after the car had travelled all day, reports Alex Fernandes.

The kittens, said an animal rescuer, were most probably only a day old when they were rescued on Monday.
Chembur resident Aniket Bhondve drove to office and said he heard a faint mewing while parking, but assumed it was a stray cat on the street.Top Picks For YouCat out of the bonnet with kittens after day-long ride
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreIn the evening, during his ride back home, intermittent purring and mewing was clearly audible. "I looked inside the car, but could not find any cat... When I opened the bonnet, I found a cat inside with four kittens (screengrab above)," he said.
Cat ran away after rescue, returned later for kittens and moved to a secure spot
 Chembur resident Aniket Bhondve was surprised to see a cat and its four newborns taken out unscathed from the engine cavity under the hood of his car after he had returned from work earlier this week. A day earlier, he had travelled from Panvel to Chembur. After the rescue, volunteer Rajesh Mahadik of animal welfare NGO, Resqink Association for Wildlife Welfare (RAWW), said the kittens seemed just littered. “We tried to bring the cat and her babies out, but the mother was aggressive,” he said. 
Co-rescuer Siddhant Dhanawade, who is adept at handling domestic felines, chipped in. He put on a pair of gloves and tried to bring the mother out. “Naturally, she tried to bite and claw at me, but she calmed down later and I could get her out. Also, the mother must have been hungry as she was holed up inside all day.” As soon as the cat was brought out, she vanished. The rescuers, worried about the newborn kittens, scooped them out and placed them in a basket and placed a camera trap to keep track of the mother’s return. 
“She did come back late at night but took only two of the four kittens. Thankfully, she returned later for the other two... She’s moved her babies to some other safe place,” said Mahadik. It’s still a mystery how she got under the car bonnet. 
“One possibility is that she found this to be a safe place to litter. Also, when temperature drops, animals tend to slip into vehicles for warmth, especially in urban landscapes,” said Pawan Sharma, president of RAWW.