Mumbai: From autorickshaw drivers who were parked nearby to doctors and staff from hospitals in Ghatkopar, citizens rushed to help those trapped, even before the dust settled on the huge collapsed billboard on Monday. The local heroes did not stop to think twice. 
Rahul Katare and Hitesh Gawde, in their driver’s uniform, one in white, the other khadi, turned their three-wheelers into the quick response team (QRT) and makeshift ambulances at the police ground petrol pump well before 4pm.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Streaked in mud, Katare told TOI near Ghatkopar railway station that he and many others lifted children, put them in their rickshaws, and took them to the civic hospital. “One little girl was hurt badly,’’ he said, pointing to his shoulder and back. By 9pm, the young Gawde had cleaned up, but one could see he was tired. Ferrying a friend and another to the petrol station, since traffic was blocked and restrictions placed, he said, “I was around. At Ramabai Colony near the petrol pump. All local rickshawallahs rushed. We did what we could. The fire brigade and ambulances showed up later. We pulled out many who were trapped and carried them to ambulances.’’
Doctors from the nearby Aarogyada multispeciality hospital immediately formed a team and fanned out to evacuate at 4 pm. Dr Sanjay Surana and Dr Rekha Chordekar from the hospital said they helped transfer three to hospitals, civic and private. “We removed one person aged 35. He was a truck driver stuck in the driver's cabin. He was taken to Rajawadi with a fractured leg. He was in shock. We gave him primary treatment in the ambulance first,’’ said Dr Surana.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreDr Chordekar at 11pm added, “One police officer while helping and searching deep under the scaffolding suffered from hypoxia. We administered oxygen and took him to anambulance. He then went back to join rescue work.” At 6.30-7pm, said Dr Chordekar, they heard the cry of a boy trapped under the base. “It was dark, the other (removal) work was on, we could not reach there...The area was cordoned off for cranes.” 
But Drs Surana and Chordekar, their colleagues, a doctor from the 108 helpline, BMC doctors and nurses, ward boys, drivers, staff of Aatya Ambulance, kept ready to move at a moment’s notice, stayed put right there all night till 5am. Doctor couple Amol and Sushma Pansare were there too. But while the cranes did their job of lifting the scaffolding out to safety, by dawn, the light had faded for eight more trapped under, said Dr Surana on Tuesday.