NEW DELHI: A litigant required to visit a court complex mostly does it with a sense of foreboding. Unaware of legal niceties or procedural requirements, entirely dependent on the advocate, entry into courts is far from a welcoming experience. This, despite Delhi having one of the most modern and accessible court buildings, be it Saket, Rouse Avenue or the high court.
This year, the judiciary has launched a project aimed at minimising the sense of discomfort and providing some relief to worried, confused litigants.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoE-sewa kendras (eSK), which were started in all seven Delhi district courts to bridge the ‘digital divide’ between lawyers, litigants and the national capital’s courts, rely heavily on technology.

These eSKs were conceived and conceptualised by the eCommittee, which was formed by the then Chief Justice of India in 2004, to facilitate litigants’ access to courts, especially the less privileged sections. With an objective of “leveraging the accessibility of services provided by the eCommittee of the Supreme Court” under the eCourts-related project, the initiative is aimed at strengthening access to justice for all.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreMeant to be one-stop solution centres for litigants, the eSKs were inaugurated between Nov 2023 and Feb 2024 by Delhi HC Acting Chief Justice Manmohan and Justice Rajiv Shakdher, chairman, information technology and artificial intelligence committee.
Underlining the project’s importance, Abhilash Malhotra, central project coordinator, told TOI, “Majority of the population has either limited or no resources to access the information technology services, due to which many face hurdles in utilising other services provided by the committee through various projects.”
To ensure visibility, the eSKs have been set up right at the public entry gate of all district court complexes -- Saket, Patiala House, Karkardooma, Rouse Avenue, Tis Hazari, Rohini and Dwarka. The idea is to provide all possible assistance to a litigant walking in. The facilities include helping in e-filing of petitions, scanning them, appending e-signatures, uploading them to the server and generation of filing number, as well as assisting in online purchase of e-stamp papers or e-payments, obtaining Aadhaar-based digital signature, and assisting in downloading the mobile app of e-courts.
These kendras also facilitate booking of e-mulakat appointments for meeting relatives in jail, sorting queries about judges on leave or a court’s location, and guide people on availing free legal services from District Legal Service Authority, High Court Legal Service Committee and Supreme Court Legal Service Committee. They also facilitate disposal of traffic challans in virtual courts. The eSKs also explain methods of arranging a video conference court hearing and provide soft copies of judicial orders and judgments via email, WhatsApp and other modes.
“The kendras also provide wheelchair facilities to senior citizens and persons with disabilities. Anyone can avail the services either by clicking the link on the website of the respective district or calling the dedicated helpline. People can connect with the eSK by scanning the QR code displayed at the court complexes,” Robinjeet, deputy registrar, Delhi HC, told TOI.
To ensure proper infrastructure, porta cabins have been built at the kendras at a cost of Rs 1.75 lakh to Rs 2.25 lakh. The estimated monthly operational cost of each eSK is between Rs 17,000 and Rs 32,000.
In a span of a few months, a large number of litigants and lawyers have begun using the e-kendras. Data shared by courts revealed that the maximum footfall was recorded at Tis Hazari and Saket court complexes, with 9,500 persons seeking various services, ranging from status of a case, next date of hearing, courtroom location to assistance in e-filing, legal aid, wheelchair availability and paying or contesting traffic challans.