VADODARA: In an unprecedented incident, a crocodile died and three other reptiles were injured in a fire raging on the banks of Pariej lake in Kheda district for the past few days.
The flames engulfed dry bushes and grass near the dens of the crocodiles on the banks and several are still staring at a dire situation. The reason for the fire is not exactly known but it's suspected that someone may have thrown a half-burnt bidi in the dry vegetation, forest officials said.
The lake was emptied by the irrigation department three months ago to carry out some developmental work including a walking path, and several people have been working at the site. As the bank is dry, the fire spread quickly. 
This is the first instance of a crocodile dying of burn injuries in Gujarat.
 Also, the Kheda and Anand districts in the luxuriant Charotar belt have a healthy population of crocodiles spread across a large number of village lakes and other water bodies.
The crocodile that died was six to seven feet long and young in age. Forest officials claimed that the blaze is under control and they have rescued five to six crocodiles in the last two days.
The lake has 40-50 crocodiles that have made dens along the bank and it's feared that the smoke may have entered their natural homes. Some are believed to have relocated to the neighbouring water bodies while others chose to remain in their dens after the lake dried up.
Members of Anand-based Nature Help Foundation, a voluntary organization engaged in wildlife conservation, has taken up the dare-devil task of rescuing and shifting the crocodiles from their dens since Monday. Their work has become all the more challenging as the crocodile eggs hatch this season and the females can get very aggressive on seeing any human nearby.
Rahul Solanki, a volunteer, said that they have already rescued about 14 crocodiles who were stuck in and around the fire by capturing and releasing them in other water bodies. "We are making all efforts to take out the crocodiles out of their dens. The fire is yet to be put out completely and we fear that many reptiles may be still stuck inside," said Solanki said.
The forest department officer said that the crocodile which died succumbed to hunger, a claim rejected by wildlife experts who assert that the reptile can survive for months without food.
"Three to four crocodiles suffered injuries and they were brought to the rescue centre in Matar for treatment. The post-mortem of the dead reptile states it died of hunger," said Pritesh Prajapati, regional forest officer (RFO), social forestry, Nadiad and in-charge of Matar forest range
He added that crocodile eggs hatch in this season and hence many of them spend a lot of time in their dens.