CHENNAI: Tamil Nadu govt will establish three permanent disaster rescue and relief centres in Chennai and its suburbs at a cost of Rs 36 crore, minister for revenue and disaster management K K S S R Ramachandran announced in the assembly on Monday.
Two multipurpose relief centres would be established in Tuticorin at a cost of Rs 17.50 crore, the minister said. 
Heatwaves would be declared a natural disaster, he said. Measures like water pandals' and special wings in govt hospitals to treat sunstroke-affected people would be opened. 
Ramachandran said the permanent shelters in Chennai and suburbs would house search and rescue equipment, including boats and vehicles. Essential commodities would be stocked in these centres.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteTwo multipurpose relief centres which are to be established in Tuticorin would function as schools or community halls on normal days. Warning systems, which would alert people in times of disasters, would be established in 1,000 places at a cost of Rs 13.25 crore. They would be used to warn people at times of floods, landslides, rough sea conditions and others.
The state will purchase boats, rescue vehicles and modern rescue equipment at Rs 105 crore. Forest department personnel would be trained in prevention of forest fires and given appropriate equipment at a cost of Rs 15 crore. 
As many as 4,960 fishermen and 225 officials of the fisheries department would be trained in disaster rescue and relief for Rs one crore. 
The Tamil Nadu disaster response force will be given skill development training at a cost of Rs 2.10 crore. The training will cover 15 types of skills, including basic training, first aid, technical training, entering crevices, borewells caves and rescuing drowning people.
As many as 6,000 volunteers from the 121 villages where multipurpose shelters have been established will be trained in first aid and rescue. They will be trained to create awareness about disasters and calamities. Govt will spend Rs 6 crore for this. 
Fire and rescue department will train 500 volunteers in Chennai and suburbs in rescue and relief. Govt will spend Rs 2 crore for this purpose.
Differential Global Positioning System (DGPS) integrated with continuous operating reference stations would be used for land survey. Pattas would be given with geo-coordinates.