PHANSIDEWA: Md Shahib (24), had barely finished the Eid namaz on Monday morning when the deafening sound of the train accident shook him. Since morning, the namaz at Nirmal Jhote village was deferred due to the incessant rain and when it did start, the prayers were completed within five minutes coinciding with the collision. Shahib and his friend Md Raju, then ran to the spot from where the sound originated less than a kilometre away."It was a terrifying sight," Shahib said. They were also the first responders at the accident site, reaching there hours before railways, police and the NDRF could move in.
Shahib said, "The initial sight was something we have never seen before. The train pile-up looked devastating as we approached the affected zone. We tried to look for survivors where the goods train engine was stuck behind the passenger train. As we tried to climb in, we saw people stuck inside, bleeding profusely." Raju, who had cut his finger while trying to bring out the loco pilots from the mangled engine, said, "There were two of them. One person appeared to be motionless, but we felt that the other person was still alive. However, at that point, apart from us and the train passengers who had come down, there was no help. There was also no ambulance to assist the injured. The locals from our village decided to step in and help the survivors. They hired a private car to shift the injured to the hospital. After some time, help arrived with officials reaching the spot."
Raju said, "We were at the Eid namaz when the incident took place. Almost everyone who attended the namaz rushed to the spot of the accident. We tried to help people in every way that we could. We would like to pray that most of those whom we could help out of the trapped compartment, survive. Later, when the administration arrived, they asked us if we needed help or not, perhaps noticing my bleeding finger."
Shahib added, "Ours is a small village. We usually leave for work in the morning. Had it not been for the Eid namaz, not many people would have been there to rush in for help. "
Shahib said, " Several of the passengers were very anxious. While they could step out of the train, in a hurry they were unable to bring out their luggage with them. And as a safety measure, the officials present at the scene of the accident were constantly urging people not to enter the damaged portions of the train. Even when the administration officials arrived, they spoke to us but discouraged us- perhaps for our own safety-not to step inside the mangled compartments alone. We hope the rescued people have survived this accident."