“It’s the pets that choose you,” believes Fahmaan Khan, who’s a happy pet dad to two rescue cats, Zoey and Zorro. In a chat with us, the Apna Time Bhi Aayega, Imlie and Pyar Ke Saat Vachan Dharampatnii actor talks about how his feline babies came into his life and changed his life for the better.
‘My cats are like my children’
Talking about how he adopted Zoey and Zorro, Fahmaan says, “Zoey just happened to stand at my door one day with a food delivery guy.While I tried to shoo her away at first, she walked inside and puked blood. I knew very little about cats, so I took her to a vet, who prescribed a few syrups and said that she had worms in her stomach. I thought I’d treat her just for a month, but as life would have it, she’s still with me. She’s a child to me, not a pet.”

    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreHe adds, “Zorro arrived six months after this. I was shooting for Ishq Mein Marjawan and this kitten came and slept in my bag. This went on for a few days and one day, I just brought her home thinking that Zoey would also find a companion.”
‘They are always at the door when I reach home’
Fahmaan says that being a cat dad has made him more responsible. “You have to take care of them, know their schedules and needs. So, it makes you more responsible overall. Earlier, I used to stay out of my house for 3-4 days at a stretch. Par ab mujhe ghar jaane ka mann karta hai, to check woh theek hai ki nahi,” he says.
He adds, “Whenever I get time to be with Zoey and Zorro, it is Father’s Day for me. However, I think I am more of a mother to them. They’ve made me feel complete and I don’t feel I’m alone anymore. It’s a beautiful feeling to have them around. When I go back home, they sense it and are always at the door when I walk in. I love to just chill with them, especially in the morning. Zoey usually wakes me up. If I’ve to be up at 6, she comes around at 5:55am, sits on my chest and starts purring. If I don’t wake up, she meows, taps my face or even slaps me!”
‘Cats are easier to handle as compared to dogs’
I was never a cat person earlier, but now I am one because I think they’re a little easier to handle as compared to dogs. What fascinates me is how they always seem so serious, even when they’re happy. And when you start living with them, you understand how each cat’s character is so different. People think cats have an attitude, but the truth is that they’re friendly only with people they live with. Woh har kisi ko itna importance nahi dete. I really admire this attitude (laughs).”