Gurgaon: A kidnapping for ransom involving an initial demand of Rs 50 lakh, a planned “rendezvous” with the abductors, a former tenant who turns a perpetrator and is helped by his wife — spanning at least three states, the crime was a case fit for a Bollywood flick.
Finally, on Wednesday morning, accused Bhupendra was arrested by Faridabad cops as he was collecting the final amount of the ransom along with his wife.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoPolice rescued 30-year-old ICICI Bank manager Satish as well. Bhupendra’s wife was also arrested later. Satish, who worked in Delhi, was kidnapped from his house in Faridabad Sector 62 on the night of April 21. 
A case was registered at Adarsh Nagar police station of Faridabad on April 22 on the complaint of his family under IPC Section 363 (kidnapping).
Planned rendezvous
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoEarly on Wednesday, Faridabad cops received specific information from Satish’s family about a planned rendezvous with the kidnappers at Keli in Ballabgarh. A trap was laid and the police arrested Bhupendra, a 30-year-old petrol pump worker, from Badauli in Palwal after he collected Rs 4 lakh from Satish’s wife. The cops rescued Satish, who was sitting in a taxi with Bhupendra’s wife. After the rescue and arrest, ACP (crime) Aman Yadav said Bhupendra, who was a tenant at Satish’s Ballabgarh house until four months ago, hatched the kidnapping plot along with a cab driver, Ravindra of Badshapur. 
Bhupendra met Ravindra nine months ago while working at a petrol pump in Ballabgarh. The duo conducted a recce at the victim’s house for a few days before executing their plan. They entered the house with a country-made firearm and a hammer when Satish was present at the house along with his father Amar Pal and a friend, Amit. 
The assailants attacked Amit with the hammer and forcibly took away Satish in his car after gagging him and tying his limbs.
From Haryana to HP & UP
Satish was initially taken to Solan in Himachal Pradesh and from there, they shifted him to their rented place in Mathura in UP, the ACP said. 
The accused contacted Satish’s family and demanded a Rs 50 lakh ransom. Later, they agreed to release Satish for Rs 5 lakh at the request of the victim's family.
The victim's family transferred Rs 1 lakh to Satish’s bank account and the offenders withdrew the amount using Satish’s debit card from different ATM centers near Mathura. On Wednesday morning, Bhupendra, along with his wife, hired a taxi in Mathura to collect Rs 4 lakh from Satish's wife at Ballabgarh near Faridabad in Haryana. “As he collected the money from the victim's wife near Keli bypass road, our team arrested Bhupendra and rescued Satish,” the ACP said.
“A pistol, a country-made firearm, three live rounds, a rope, a car and Rs 4 lakh cash were seized from the accused,” Faridabad police spokesperson Sube Singh said. The police have launched a manhunt to nab Ravindra, who is absconding.