Two snake catchers in Coimbatore found themselves in a tight spot after posting a video of their rat snake rescue operation on social media. The video went viral, and on Monday evening officials from the Coimbatore forest division arrested the two, who were later produced before a judicial magistrate and released on bail.
The forest department issued a statement on Tuesday morning, stating that Abdul Rahman, alias Sanjay, from Puliyakulam, and Uma Maheswari from Chinnavedampatti were booked under the Wildlife Protection Act for capturing videos of the rescue of an Indian rat snake without permission and uploading the video on social media.
Although there are several snake catchers in the area, here’s what the duo did wrong according to district forest officer N Jayaraj. “People who handle snakes should use tongs to capture them. Also, after rescuing the snakes, they must secure them in a bag and hand them over to forest department officials. The snakes are then released into the reserve forest. They should not take videos of themselves holding the snakes.”
In the viral video, Uma Maheswari is shown holding the snake twisted around her arms as she speaks. Uma, who works with Jeeva Shanthi Trust which cremates unclaimed bodies, has partnered with Abdul to rescue snakes in residential areas and hand them over to the forest department. Abdul has rescued around 20,000 snakes over the past 24 years in Coimbatore city.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA Institute“We rescued the rat snake from the corporation water tank area on the afternoon of May 22. Uma, who has been working with me for the last four years, recorded videos after the rescue to request people to inform her if they notice snakes in residential areas,” says Abdul. This video was created to sensitise the public. I even saved the video as my WhatsApp status. Many online media channels downloaded the video and that’s how it went viral.”
Abdul says despite the arrest, he received more than seven rescue calls on Tuesday. “I asked the people to contact the forest department to capture the snakes,” he says.
Uma Maheswari, says Jayaraj, is not a snake handler. “After rescuing the snake, instead of handing it over to the forest department, the two kept it with them for one and a half hours. Rat snakes are now included in the Wildlife Protection Act under Schedule 1 (endangered species that need rigorous protection), so we are required to register a case and make an arrest,” he says.
The Tamil Nadu forest department has a list of snake handlers across the state, which is likely to be released soon, says Jayaraj. “Snake handlers must not collect money from the public for rescues.”
(Email your feedback with name and address to southpole.toi@timesgroup.com)