New Delhi: Women on windowsills, people frantically trying to escape the blaze, firemen in gas masks storming the building and people being stretchered out — chaotic scenes unfolded at ITO after a fire broke out at a tax building on Tuesday afternoon.
“I couldn’t even breathe. The staircase was filled with smoke. We were running blindly down the darkened stairs,” said Ramesh K, who had come to meet his friend who worked on the second floor of the building.
A relieved individual rescued from the third floor said, “I was certain I wouldn't be able to escape.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThen I saw a colleague. We together spotted a faint light and shuffled towards it to find it was a window. We managed to open it and sat on the ledge for 15 minutes before firefighters rescued us. It was a horrific experience.”
It was around lunch time and Jitender and his colleagues from the CGST section had just finished their midday meal. They noticed the dense smoke billowing from the third floor. “There was a frenzied rush to the doors to escape to safety,” he said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreRam Virikash Pandey, 60, was climbing up to the second floor when he noticed smoke entering the lift. “The lift stopped. I got out to find the lights were also out and there were loud screams about a fire,” said Pandey, who managed to exit the elevator quickly before it shut down when the power was cut.
On the second floor, Sonu, 36, smelled something burning. The odour intensified as smoke began to waft in. “Breathing became difficult. Within a few seconds, there was heavy smoke in the entire area. Our seniors told us to exit as quickly as possible, with or without our belongings,” he said.
Many employees informed the fire personnel of the floors where people possibly could be trapped. The firefighters saw two women who had escaped the flames but were trapped on the windowsills. They brought the thoroughly shaken women down the turntable ladders. “One of them was an office superintendent and the other, an inspector rank officer,” a fire officer said.
Once the ladders were placed to reach the third floor, the firefighters ascended, broke the windowpanes and entered the burning floor. Four people, among them a differently abled person, were rescued.
The rescue operations were a challenge. Fire officers couldn’t use the stairs because of the dense smoke. A team of firefighters donned breathing apparatus sets and began searching the floors for trapped people. On the third floor, they found a person lying close to the door, who had probably collapsed after inhaling hazardous smoke. He was stretchered out of the building and rushed to hospital but was declared dead on arrival there.