National Geographic Society Announces Competition to Combat Illegal Fishing Society’s Marine Protection Prize will award $450,000 for innovative solutions and technologies that protect and sustain fisheries in coastal communities The National Geographic Society has announced the opening of registration for the 2017 Marine Protection Prize. The competition will source the best uses of technology and data collection to help combat illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing affecting island nations and coastal communities. In May 2018, the Society will award a share of $450,000 to up to three teams of experts employing the most innovative solutions to halt the growing, global overfishing challenge. Scientists, environmental leaders and students are encouraged to apply. “Across the globe, oceans, marine ecosystems and global fishing economies are severely impacted by overfishing and illegal fishing. National Geographic is pleased to launch this competition to identify and elevate solutions that help ensure healthy fisheries and, more broadly, a planet in balance.” Gary E. Knell, president and CEO, National Geographic Society Overfishing and illegal fishing threaten our oceans, food security and the livelihood of island nations and coastal communities. The Marine Protection Prize competition seeks to identify a range of solutions that offer low-cost and easy-to-maintain technologies that address the needs of local communities. Applications for the Marine Protection Prize must include an overview of the team members, a detailed explanation of the proposed solution, a project plan and anticipated budget, among other items. Submissions will be reviewed by a panel of judges carefully chosen for their expertise and experience. The panel consists of evaluation members, expert members and selection committee members. Registration for the competition is open until Feb. 8, 2018, at 5 p.m. Eastern Time. Applications must then be submitted by March 8, 2018, at 5 p.m. Eastern Time. Interested individuals or teams must register online to submit an application. To learn more about the Marine Protection Prize or register to apply, visit www.marineprotectionprize.com. The National Geographic Society is a leading nonprofit that invests in bold people and transformative ideas in the fields of exploration, scientific research, storytelling and education. Through our grants and programs, we aspire to create a community of change, advancing key insights about our planet and probing some of the most pressing scientific questions of our time while ensuring that the next generation is armed with geographic knowledge and global understanding. Our goal is measurable impact: furthering exploration and educating people around the world to inspire solutions for the greater good. For more information, visit www.nationalgeographic.org.