Nominations for the 2019 Tusk Conservation Awards Now Open Each year Tusk honours extraordinary individuals battling on the frontline in the fight for wildlife conservation in Africa. Nominate your 2019 Conservation Heroes now. Ask yourself…… Have the lives of the people and wildlife of Africa been improved through their leadership? Have they had a significant impact on wildlife population numbers? Do they provide mentorship? Have their ideas been replicated across the continent, or should they be? If the answer is yes to any of these then they need to be recognised! The judges assess the nominee’s outstanding contribution towards any, or all, of the following areas: wildlife and habitat conservation, development and delivery of environmental education, and sustainable community development programmes designed to enhance conservation. There are three awards – please choose the one which fits your nominee. If you are unsure please email Sarah, sarah@tusk.org and she will answer any queries you have. A lifetime achievement award, which recognises outstanding dedication and exceptional contribution to conservation in Africa. This award is sponsored by Investec Asset Management. The winner receives a grant of £40,000 towards their work. CLICK HERE to submit a Nomination for the 2019 Prince William Award for Conservation in Africa This award is for an individual who has been judged to be emerging as a leading conservationist and in recognition of their outstanding contribution to conservation and considerable success shown in their chosen field. This award is sponsored by Land Rover. The winner receives a grant of £20,000 towards their work. The two finalists each receive a grant of £7,500. CLICK HERE to submit a Nomination for the 2019 Tusk Award for Conservation in Africa This award is to give international recognition to the men and women who work in the field protecting wildlife in Africa on a daily basis. The award is being generously sponsored by a private US foundation. The winner receives a grant of £10,000. CLICK HERE to submit a Nomination for the 2019 Tusk Wildlife Ranger Award If you know someone exceptional then please take the time to nominate them, a few hours of your time you could change someones life.  To complete the nomination form please email info@tuskawards.com to receive an invitation to the online form. The pre nomination form must be submitted no later than 8th March 2019. This form will be submitted to the Nominating Committee. If the Committee decide to propose your nominee to the judges you will be contacted before 29th March 2019 to obtain further information on the nominee, including references from three individuals, one of whom must be an in-country referee. Can you keep a secret? Please keep your nomination confidential from the nominee and ask the supporting referees to do the same. Thank you for helping to make the Tusk Awards a success!