NAGPUR: In two separate raids, the forest officials of Nagpur division arrested five persons and seized seven tiger nails, 13 whiskers and 6kg bones. Poaching of multiple tigers is involved.
Deputy conservator of forests (DyCF) Dr Bharat Singh Hada said that both the raids conducted on Thursday were follow-up to the earlier action taken in the recent past.
From July 29, World Tiger Day, till now officials have arrested 29 persons in various poaching cases. All accused have been sent to jail.
Hada said that based on information from cyber cell, two persons were arrested with a tiger nail and three bone pieces from Sitapur (Gondi) in Deolapar forest range. The accused, Rajkumar Markam (29) and Kamalsingh Bhalavi (40), have been remanded to forest custody till September 16.
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoIn another raid, three tiger poachers were arrested from Bhatari in Pombhurna range in Central Chanda. The village is on the fringes of Kanhargaon wildlife sanctuary and the tiger was electrocuted in the FDCM area.
Officials seized six tiger nails and 13 whiskers, besides weapons and wire snares. The accused were identified as Ramchandra Bawne from Kemara village and Yogesh Todase and Prabhakar Todase, both from Bhatari in Pombhurna range. All are habitual wildlife criminals and were going to strike a deal at Borkhedi toll plaza on NH-7.
Sources said the tiger was electrocuted in January this year due to live electric wires laid to kill herbivores for bushmeat. The accused had removed the tiger’s body parts and burned the carcass.
Officials said the accused showed the spot where the tiger was buried but only 5.5kg bones were recovered. “It is suspected they must have removed the tiger skin,” said officials.
According to sources, this is a fresh case of tiger poaching and has nothing to do with the four accused arrested on August 31 from Pachgaon, which is also on the fringes of Kanhargaon. “Officials had seized 16 tiger bones, skull, whiskers, canines, porcupine quills, peacock feathers and other body parts from them,” said sources. 
Prior to this, another gang of four accused was arrested with tiger body parts from Masal near Tadoba and Tass near Umred-Karhandla wildlife sanctuary on August 27. This indicates that at least 4-5 tigers must have been poached. 
Separate gangs are targeting tigers in territorial areas where protection has reached a new low. Earlier, in Deolapar case, 13kg tiger bones were seized from the accused on August 26.
ACFs Narendra Chandewar said that more arrests are likely in the Sitapur case. Till the filing of this report, the action by forest officials continued.