A six-member gang of a community of traditional hunters from north India was arrested near the Sathyamangalam Tiger Reserve in Tamil Nadu on February 20, 2023, with a skin and body parts of a tiger hunted a week back, and jaw traps and weapons. For shocked forest department officials and conservationists, this was just another instance showing that organised tiger poaching — though significantly reduced over the last decade — still poses a threat.
Organised poaching is viewed with extreme seriousness by authorities, as it can literally wipe out entire tiger population even in protected tiger reserves like Panna in Madhya Pradesh in 2009 and Sariska in Rajasthan in 2004.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoPanna later scripted a success story with the tiger reintroduction project, making it home to 25 tigers now, while Sariska has 11.
Crackdown on organized tiger poaching over the last two decades led to dismantling of many gangs. But a surge in tiger population across the country, and demand for tiger skin and body parts in international black markets, make the threat of organized poaching a constant danger.
“Organized tiger poaching has not been wiped out, but it has gone down drastically in the last decade. Sustained efforts by enforcement agencies from 2004 to 2013 led to most known wildlife traders ending up behind bars. Now, organized tiger trade is not even 5% in Central India and 25% in North India of what it was. But that does not allow us to lower our guard,” says Nitin Desai, director, Central India, Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI).
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoNational Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) has pegged tiger deaths due to poaching at 193 from 2012 to 2020. Between 2017 and 2021, NTCA recorded 547 tiger deaths, 393 of which were due to natural causes, and 88 (16%) attributed to poaching for body parts and illegal wildlife trade. In 2022, 117 tiger deaths were recorded, including 10 tiger body parts seizures.
Conservationists say integrating traditional hunting communities into mainstream society is the key in the battle against organized poaching. For many, hunting is their sole skill and could be exploited by middlemen and agents in the illegal trade. In Madhya Pradesh alone, nearly 500 persons are allegedly involved in trade of tiger skin and organs, with some 70 from the nomadic Pardhi community.
Even as coordinated tiger poaching has abated, a potent threat has emerged in ‘accidental poaching’ and ‘opportunistic poaching’, with tigers getting caught in wire traps set for wild boars and deer for exotic game meat.
In Maharashtra too, the six tiger reserves sent 50-60 poachers from Bawaria and Pardhi communities behind bars, in association with Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB) from Delhi, Haryana, and Madhya Pradesh. But local gangs are still active.
In Telangana, tribals living in and outside tiger reserves and corridors become ‘accidental poachers’ while hunting for wild boar or deer. Principal chief conservator of forests RM Dobriyal says, “There are no professional poachers in Telangana.”
In Rajasthan, where poaching gangs emptied Sariska reserve of tigers in 2004, gangs have been greatly reduced. However, local poaching is still prevalent on the fringes.
Rajeev Mehta, former honorary wildlife warden of Rajaji Tiger Reserve in Uttarakhand, said while poaching cannot be completely eradicated, it can be reduced with effective measures. He stressed for focus on corridors between forests.
Conservationists feel that though tiger conservation efforts in Project Tiger reduced poaching, they largely overlooked the low conviction rates and delays in prosecuting crimes.
In Tamil Nadu, there were three cases of poaching from 2018 to February 2023, but no convictions. Tamil Nadu state chief wildlife warden Srinivas R Reddy says threat of ‘retaliatory killings’ arises when cattle living on the fringes are mauled by tigers or leopards. He added that lack of data on wildlife offenders, and lack of ateam to get intelligence as challenges.
“The conviction rates in wildlife cases is very low. Remoteness of crime scene makes it difficult to get independent eyewitnesses. The focus should be on empowering the department with latest facilities for sample preservation and evidence collection, to make cases fool proof. Also judiciary and prosecutors should be sensitized,” says a senior forest department official from Kerala.
Deputy director (east) of Wildlife Crime Control Bureau, Kolkata, Agni Mitra says, “In many cases, foresters don’t even get custody of accused for interrogation. A fast-track or special courts can address this. Even the model of assigning special courts, like in Assam, is also welcome. Also, we need to teach city dwellers that wildlife crimes are equally heinous.”
POACHING METHODS
WIRE SNARES OR STEEL JAW TRAPS
Most favoured poaching tools, easily available or manufactured in any village using scrap wires, springs etc. Laid on natural trails used by wildlife to target specific animals. Also used by villagers to poach herbivores for game meat, accidentally killing big cats too
GUNS
Very rare method of poaching these days, as it draws attention, and requires the presence of poachers for long hours lying in wait for the animal
EXPLOSIVES
Used mostly by villagers and farmers to keep wild boar away from farms, but are known to accidentally kill many herbivores, even elephants
ELECTROCUTION
Biggest killer of tigers in the recentpast, favoured by villagers on the fringes of reserves and forests to electrify fences to keep away herbivores that destroy crops, big cats that hunt herbivores also get electrocuted. Many humans too die on accidentally touching electrified fences. Lax enforcement of policies on line tripping alerts etc by transmission companies blamed for many deaths
POISONING
Usually used in retaliatory killings by villagers. Farmers poisoncarcasses of cattle killed by big cats, killing the felines within minutes after they consume the dead animal. Quick, assured disbursal of compensation on cattle kills one way of avoiding poisoning
NOT POACHING. . . BUT ROADS KILL ANIMALS
Widening, laying of new highways through forests, leading to higher speeds, cause a huge number of animal casualties
Inputs from Vijay Pinjarkar at Nagpur, Krishnendu Mukherjee at Kolkata, P Naveen at Bhopal, Komal Gautham in Telangana, and Oppili Padmanabhan in Tamil Nadu.