Panaji: Forest officials on Saturday apprehended 16 employees of the Kadamba Transport Corporation Ltd (KTC) from Salgini village inside the Netravali wildlife sanctuary on suspicion of poaching. Live cartridges were found on one of the employees. They have been booked under Section 9 of the Wildlife Protection Act on charges of attempting to carry out hunting.
On Saturday, the 16 KTC employees entered the forest through the forest department checkpost at Netravali by informing forest officials that they are going in for a day picnic.However, late on the same night, the forest officials found that the group had not returned.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
On patrolling inside the wildlife sanctuary, forest guards heard some activity and went on to check and found the 16 employees trying to cook by preparing a fire inside the sanctuary area, sources said.
On searching the 16, live cartridges were found in the bag of one of the KTC employees.Sources said that on inquiring, one worker said he owns a licenced gun for which the cartridges were bought and the cartridges, he claimed, were accidentally left in his bag. No gun was found with the group.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoSources said that the investigations were taken seriously as one from the group has a past case against him of poaching using explosives.
They were, on Sunday, produced before the JMFC Sanguem who granted them bail with the condition that they will report for the investigation as and when required over the next five days.Further investigations by the forest department are in progress in the incident.
“The group claimed that they had come to the sanctuary for a picnic to celebrate one of their jobs being confirmed. They had claimed they were preparing to cook 15kg chicken. On search it was confirmed that 15kg chicken was in their possession. But as live cartridges have been found and one has a history of poaching the case is being investigated further. The KTC has been informed in writing about its employees being involved in an alleged poaching case," said a source.