Nagpur: Even as the dust over tiger poaching by gangs of poachers from Haryana and Punjab is yet to settle, electrocution is again appearing as an equally bigger threat for big cats. Electrocution has claimed three tigers in the last 20 days.
Information received under the RTI Act shows 27 tigers have been electrocuted in Maharashtra in the last five years, from 2017-2022.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe number may be more if tigers dying due to the same reason are added to the tally in 2023. During the same period, 25 leopards were also electrocuted in the state.


    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoFour days after a tiger was electrocuted in Tumsar range in Bhandara forest division, a five-year-old male tiger died in a farm at Bondri in Ramtek range on Saturday evening. The formalities were completed on Sunday morning at TTC, Seminary Hills.
This is the third tiger death due to electrocution. On July 31, a tigress was found dead on a farm in the Bhadravati range in Chandrapur, but the accused was released on a bond, violating the Wildlife Protection Act (WPA) 1972.
There is a state-level steering committee under PCCF (wildlife) to monitor electrocution deaths, but the committee has not met for over 2.5 years. “This is a serious issue. I will take a call and the committee will meet soon,” said Maheep Gupta, PCCF (wildlife).
On August 16, Ratanlal Waghmare, Khandal, was arrested for a tiger death on his farm. On August 20, Vinod Parteti (43), Kandri, and Sanjay Thakkar (53), Nagpur, were arrested for electrifying a farm fence leading to the death of a tiger.
“Both the accused have been remanded to forest custody (FCR) by a Ramtek court. We are planning to take up the farm owners too. The spot where the tiger died is a corridor and 2.5km from the Chorbahuli range of neighbouring Pench,” said Bharat Singh Hada, deputy conservator of forest (DyCF), Nagpur.
The forest staff received information from some locals about the tiger’s death on Saturday evening. The tiger was shifted to Transit Treatment Centre (TTC), Seminary Hills, where a post mortem was performed as per NTCA protocol.
Forest sources said the accused farm workers seem to be regular offenders and earlier a wild boar was electrocuted. The two have confessed to electrifying the fence.
Even as tiger deaths due to electrocution are rampant, the conviction rate of these accused is virtually zero. Despite the WPA 1972 laying down stringent provisions and such cases imply hunting, there is lack of strong prosecution by the foresters.
“The WPA does not have anything for intent. If you kill a tiger you are a poacher, and the method and reason for killing is immaterial except if it is in self-defence. Section 9 clearly prohibits ‘hunting’ and Section 2 (16) defines hunting as killing or injuring the animal etc or even an attempt to do so,” said wildlife crime experts.
“A tiger being killed in an electric farm fence is a case of poaching and not an accident. It has to be looked at through the prism of Section 9 of WPA. There is no other way as there is no other provision,” said conservationists.