NEW DELHI: Chief minister Arvind Kejriwal alleged on Thursday that BJP has kept aside Rs 800 crore to poach AAP legislators in Delhi and wondered if the money came from the GST collection or the PM Cares Fund.
Talking to reporters after a meeting with party MLAs at his residence, Kejriwal alleged that the saffron party was trying to lure 40 AAP MLAS, offering them Rs 20 crore each to switch sides.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo“BJP needs 40 MLAs to topple my government. They’ve kept Rs 800 crores for this. The people need to know the source of this money. Is it from GST or the PM Cares Fund or have some of their friends given them this amount?” asked Kejriwal.
Declaring that AAP MLAs were not for sale, the CM said, “Our government is stable and Delhi will continue to progress regardless of these obstacles.” Kejriwal also praised deputy CM Manish Sisodia and his MLAs saying they would lose their heads rather than sell themselves.
After the meeting, Kejriwal and his party colleagues went to Rajghat to pay tributes to Mahatma Gandhi and pray for the failure of BJP’s “Operation Lotus”. Amid initial reports that 11 AAP MLAs were incommunicado since morning, 53 legislators reached the CM’s residence to attend the meeting. While Okhla MLA joined the meeting through a phone call, seven MLAs, including deputy CM Manish Sisodia and Speaker Ram Niwas Goel, were travelling. Former health minister Satyendar Jain is in judicial custody in a money laundering case.
Kejriwal said there was no logic behind the allegations levelled by BJP, evidenced by their regularly changing the amount involved in the so-called “scam” from Rs 1.5 lakh crore to Rs 1,100 to Rs 144 crore. “The CBI FIR says the scam is of Rs 1 crore. All talks of scam are rubbish. The real scam is Operation Lotus, in which BJP offered 20 crore to each of our MLA,” the CM said. “Even mattresses and walls at Sisodia's residence were searched by CBI but not even a single unaccounted penny or objectionable documents was found,” Kejriwal said. CBI conducted raids at 31 locations across seven states, including the office and residence of Sisodia, last week amid allegations of irregularities in Delhi Excise Policy 2021-22.
In a tweet, Kejriwal used an analogy for BJP’s demands for evidence on the said attempt to bribe AAP legislators. He tweeted, “There is a serial killer. He committed six murders in the same pattern. He then attempted another murder in same pattern. This time he failed. The victim is saying that he was attacked, saw the attacker. But the media is asking for evidence from the victim,” Kejriwal tweeted.
In a separate press conference, AAP’s chief spokesperson Saurabh Bhardwaj said that the party MLAs meeting at Kejriwal’s residence had expressed “unequivocal support” to the chief minister. He derided BJP for spreading the “big lie” that many AAP MLAs would skip the meeting. Kalkaji MLA Atishi charged, “The PM is not bothered about the most pressing issues in the country — rising inflation and falling employment. He is busy toppling democratically elected governments in the states. All his time and energy go into bulldozing the mandate of the people,” she declared.