Nagpur: A day after a full-grown tiger was mowed down by a speeding train on the Ballarshah-Kazipeth railway line in Chandrapur district, a tiger was found cut into 14-15 pieces with some body parts missing, in Samudrapur range under the Wardha forest division on Friday. One more tiger is suspected to have been killed recently in Sindewahi, as a man was caught trying to sell some body parts at Chimur.
The tiger cut into pieces was killed 7-8 days ago but forest staff learned about it only on Thursday evening from local people.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoWith this, the tiger toll in Maharashtra has mounted to 18 since January 1, 2022. In the other case, forest officials nabbed an accused from a bar and restaurant at Chimur while striking a deal for tiger nails and other body parts. The tiger is suspected to have been eliminated in the Sindewahi forest range.
Talking to TOI, Wardha deputy conservator of forests (DyCF) Rakesh Sepat said, “A decomposed carcass was noticed in zudpi jungle survey number 57 of Kora beat on August 11 evening but all the formalities were completed on Friday. Prima facie it seems to be a case of poaching as the canines, claws, and paws of the tiger are missing. No suspects have been nabbed till now.”
The zudpi jungle of Pawangaon, where the big cat was found dead, is on the edge of Wardha division and forest connects territorial forests of Bhadrawati, Warora, Khadsangi, and Chimur ranges and further to Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve (TATR).
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoSepat said, “There is no record of resident tigers in the area, but big cats do frequent the Samudrapur range due to contiguous corridor. The carcass seems to be seven days old and due to rains it had deteriorated further with maggots.”
Sources said the tiger is suspected to have been electrocuted in a farm fence, and in a bid to destroy evidence it was chopped into 14 pieces. The accused also decamped with vital body parts, but left behind the lower jaw. The tiger carcass was meticulously cut into pieces, which appears to have been done by a professional.
The post mortem was conducted by veterinarians Megha Vankar, Sushil Pandav, and Sachin Khemlapure, in the presence of DFO (vigilance) PG Kodape, Samudrapur RFO VV Barekar, anti-poaching squad RFO Ashish Ninawe, mobile squad RFO AS Talhan, PCCF and NTCA representatives Kaustabh Gawande and Sanjay Ingle-Teegaonkar. However, the veterinary doctors could not ascertain from the bones whether it was a male or female tiger.
In the other case, one more tiger appears to have been poached in Sindewahi under the Bramhapuri forest division. An accused identified as Jasbirsingh Sangatsingh Anderele from Keslapur in Chimur tehsil was nabbed while striking a deal to sell tiger body parts.
The accused was lured into a trap and caught at Trupti Bar and Restaurant, Chimur, by ACF Abhijeet Vaikos, RFOs KW Dhankute, Khadsangi, and round officer KB Gurnule. Talking to TOI, TATR deputy director (buffer) G Guruprasad said, “The accused claimed to have killed the tiger in the Sindewahi range. He has been booked under various sections of the Wildlife Protection Act (WPA), 1972.”