AHMEDABAD/RAJKOT: The seizure of 22 dolphins and four shark carcasses off Porbandar coast last week has exposed a thriving illegal trade that spiced up the palates in China and some other south Asian countries where soup made from shark fins is considered to be a premium delicacy.

Interrogation of the 10 fishermen caught with the catch revealed that dolphins were used as bait to trap sharks whose fins were extracted for export.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThis trade is carried out via Sri Lanka, Hong Kong and Singapore, mostly from south India, forest officials told TOI. This is the first instance of dolphins, which enjoy the highest protection under Wildlife Protection Act, being used as baits in Gujarat seas. The carcasses were those of bull sharks found in the sea from Gujarat to the south.

    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo In 2015, India banned the export of these fins which are exclusively harvested for international trade as shark meat is not consumed here. 
The ban was imposed as fishermen used to extract the fins and leave the sharks to die of heavy bleeding.

A senior forest department officer said, "The fishermen admitted using dolphin carcasses as trap sharks. However they don't have any direct connection with the international fins trafficking. We are trying to find out whom they were supplying the fins and how the stock was crossing the Indian border."
They came to Gujarat as the number of sharks is lesser at Tamil Nadu and Kerala coasts.
According to sources, the price of Indian fins in the international market is anywhere between Rs 15,000 and Rs 20,000 per kg.

Not just China, but the demand for shark fins is high in the US and Europe too. To kill the sharks, the fishermen used ages-old harpoons which are now banned. 
The modus operandi was simple after hunting dolphins, its meat was hung in the net and this would attract sharks as dolphin was the favourite food for the sharks.
Experts said fins of whale, bull sharks or blue sharks cannot be differentiated and hence any species was a pricey catch for these fishermen.
The arrested fishermen narrowed down on Porbandar after the December 2022 dolphin census revealed their sizeable population.

Dolphins being used as bait for large mammals is well-documented by researchers, but this recent catch from the fishing boat "Dayanas-2" reveals that the schedule-I mammal was used to hunt sharks. 
Shark trade is also said to be rampant from Cochin Port, investigation revealed.
A research by four mammal experts in 2018 had revealed that extraction and use of dolphin blubber oil to attract the sharks was rampant. Dolphins were used as baits in both India and Bangladesh, in the Ganges and Brahmaputra rivers while the practice was common in the central Ganges.