JALANDHAR: Jalandhar West's AAP legislator Sheetal Angural, who is at the centre of his party's allegations against the BJP of approaching, alluring, and threatening its MLAs, had started his political career with the BJP and switched sides only a day before getting the election ticket.
Angural claimed on Wednesday that a bait of Rs 25 crore had also been thrown at him for joining the BJP, and his old party had even threatened him but he will not cow down.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoHe was BJP's Scheduled Caste Morcha state general secretary and then member of its national executive for two terms. 
He was a loyalist of former Union minister and now National SC Commission chairman Vijay Sampla. His brother, Rajan Angural, also contested Jalandhar's municipal election on the BJP ticket in 2012 but lost to Sushil Rinku of the Congress, who later became MLA in 2017.
Angural brothers' opposition to Rinku is not only political but also personal, and they make no attempt to hide it. Sheetal Angural got his AAP ticket in the last week of December within 24 hours of switching sides. On Thursday, some BJP workers posted his pictures from the BJP days online and asked him how he had won the AAP ticket. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreOn August 17, he came out with allegations that people claiming to be from the Lawrence Bishnoi gang had threatened him on telephone to resign from the assembly. 
He had reported it on June 14 but taken two months to make it public, claiming that he wanted to wait until police were close to catching the callers.
His FIR suggests that the calls had started comi9ng on June 5, from two foreign numbers and through WhatsApp. The callers would threaten to kill his family, and on June 11, when they sent him a picture of his friend, he stated taking the threat seriously.