BHOPAL: Fifteen people from five states who were involved in pangolin poaching received a three-year prison sentence as well as a fine of Rs 10,000 from a trial court in Madhya Pradesh’s Seoni district.
Additionally, seven other accused individuals have been declared proclaimed offenders in this case. This marks the third conviction in a pangolin smuggling case linked to an international gang.
The gang was apprehended by a Special Investigation Team (SIT) led by assistant conservator of forests (ACF) Ritesh Sirothia. 
The SIT was formed in March 2015 by the then Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife), Narendra Kumar, in consultation with the then additional principal chief conservator of forests (Wildlife), Suhas Kumar. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoForester Shekar Sharma and two range officers -Nitin Nigam and Inder Singh Bare – played a major role in cracking the network. 
Expressing satisfaction with the judgment, an officer said, "We are extremely happy that after 8 years the judgment came in our favour." 
The SIT operated under the guidance of Chief Conservator of Forests (CCF) Chitranjan Tyagi of Chhindwara.
The chief judicial magistrate (CJM) court pronounced the verdict. 
“The court found all 15 accused guilty of illegal trade and transportation of pangolin scales and sentenced each of them to three years of imprisonment and a fine of Rs 10,000. The officials posted at Pench Tiger Reserve, both during the time of the offence and presently, played an exemplary role in this case,” the officer said.
Through persistent efforts and meticulous investigation, the SIT exposed interstate and international gangs operating in over 10 states in India and abroad. Initially, three cases were registered in Balaghat, Seoni (Pench Tiger Reserve), and Chhindwara, leading to the arrest of 42 accused individuals from various states. Considering the extent of the syndicate's involvement, the wildlife wing dissolved the SIT and formed a more robust and resourceful team called the Special Task Force (STF) for Pangolin-related offences. 
Subsequently, the STF apprehended over 170 people, including two foreign citizens, from more than 14 states.
This operation against wildlife poachers and traffickers is perhaps the largest of its kind in the country. The efforts of the STF have gained recognition at national and international platforms, such as Interpol, UNODC, and CITES COP. Currently, some cases are yielding positive outcomes for the government, while others are still awaiting trial.
Officials revealed that an international poaching syndicate, involved in smuggling pangolin scales to China and Vietnam, had a well-established network in Madhya Pradesh. 
The Madhya Pradesh forest department dismantled the network with the arrest of its mastermind, and they sought assistance from Interpol. The scales of the pangolin, highly sought-after in China for its perceived aphrodisiac properties, have now become a popular commodity among party-goers in America. According to a recent Interpol report, 26 per cent of the scales from this endangered species are being channelled into the US party circuit. 
While the Chinese demand for pangolins was widely known and prompted the crackdown on the racket with connections to Myanmar, the escalating use of pangolin scales in the production of crystal methamphetamine, a key ingredient in the party drug commonly known as crystal meth, crank, speed, or ice, has presented another challenge for the Madhya Pradesh forest department's Special Task Force.