The CEOs of Air India and Akasa Air have engaged in a private exchange of barbs over pilot recruitment, with Akasa accusing its rival of rule violations, according to a Reuters report. Air India on its part has said that any collusion to curb job switches is against the competition law.
This dispute, as revealed in a September 21 letter seen by Reuters, underscores the intensifying competition in India's aviation sector.PollDo you think India’s PLI scheme for smartphones has been a success?YesNoCan't SayThe resurgence of air travel post-pandemic and a surge in aircraft orders have resulted in a shortage of pilots.
The rare written and verbal spat has been detailed in a letter sent by Tata Group-owned Air India’s CEO Campbell Wilson to Vinay Dube of the low-cost carrier Akasa. The letter followed a phone conversation and a communication from Dube expressing concerns to the Tata Group.
In the September 21 letter, Air India contested Akasa Air’s accusation of breaching government policies that require a notice period of six to 12 months for pilots, rules currently contested in Indian courts by pilots' groups. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoWilson stated that the government rules were "not currently enforceable" and pointed out that Akasa had previously engaged in similar actions by poaching pilots from Tata Group's Air India Express and other airlines. He noted, "It was a little surprising to us that Akasa now found the practice objectionable."
Akasa Air: From low flight ticket prices to new routes & international expansion plans; details here
Akasa did not comment on its correspondence with Air India but mentioned that the issue of pilot exits is now “behind us”, and they are focusing on growth.
Amid this conflict, Air India is on a hiring spree, with Air India Express planning to significantly expand its fleet. Meanwhile, Akasa has experienced the departure of approximately 10% of its 450 pilots, some of whom joined Air India Express without serving notice periods.
In September, Akasa expressed concerns about a potential shutdown and filed lawsuits against certain pilots and the aviation regulatory authority for not providing assistance. These legal cases are currently awaiting resolution in the courts.
In the letter, Wilson mentioned cautioning Dube during the telephone conversation that requesting a competitor to collaborate in restricting employees' job-switching rights could potentially violate competition law. “I regret that you interpreted my courtesy of taking your call and listening to your request as assent,” Wilson reportedly wrote.
The Federation of Indian Pilots has described the alleged mass resignations from Akasa as an indication of employee dissatisfaction. India's aviation regulator has declined to intervene in employment contract-related matters.
Akasa, India's newest airline, started operating in 2022, capturing a 4% market share. It competes with IndiGo, holding a 60% market share, and Tata Group's airlines, which collectively account for 25.7% of the market.
In the September 21 letter, Wilson expressed hope that Akasa would invest in attracting, retaining, and developing its own staff, emphasizing a commitment to healthy competition.