Bhubaneswar: Tribal leader Niranjan Bishi, named a BJD Rajya Sabha nominee on Sunday, is one of the many former critics of the Naveen Patnaik government who were taken into the ruling regional party fold and given important responsibilities in recent years.
From media tycoon-turned-politician Soumya Ranjan Patnaik to Bhubaneswar mayor Sulochana Das, Cuttack mayor Subhash Singh and health minister Naba Kisore Das and MLA Bhupinder Singh, the list of opponents-turned-associates is getting longer.
Bishi was fighting for the cause of tribals and had led several agitations against the government in Balangir. Only recently, he led a stir demanding more reservations for the tribals in the panchayat elections held in February. He was inducted into the party and given a Rajya Sabha ticket three days later.
Soumya, currently MLA from Khandapada, had joined BJD in an almost similar fashion in March 2018 and was given a berth in the upper house days after. He later vacated the RS seat to fight the 2019 assembly election. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoSoumya, son-in-law of former chief minister J B Patnaik and younger brother of senior Congress leader Niranjan Patnaik, was extremely vocal against Naveen over the farmers’ plight and the chit fund scam before that. 
In March 2014, the then leader of opposition, Bhupinder Singh, and the man criticising Naveen almost on a daily basis, had left Congress and joined BJD. He was sent to the Rajya Sabha a few months later the same year. Bhupinder is currently BJD MLA from the Narla assembly segment.
As a Congress spokesperson, Sulochana was among the most visible TV faces to be vocal against BJD politics and policies before she joined the Naveen-led party in 2017. She was appointed as chairperson of the Odisha state Commission for Persons with Disabilities and served in the post before she was fielded as the mayoral candidate of Bhubaneswar in March.
Naba, the current health minister, joined BJD in the run-up to the 2019 simultaneous Lok Sabha and Odisha assembly elections. Before that, Naba as a Congress MLA was among the most vocal leaders against BJD both inside and outside the assembly.
Cuttak mayor Subhash was a prominent CPI (M) leader and was credited with mobilising the economically weaker sections on many political issues before he joined BJD. The list doesn’t end here. Analysts feel Naveen has been cleverly taking on board people who can be assets for him without bothering about their past political affiliation.