Ahmedabad: A person has been convicted for poaching a migratory bird for the first time in the history of Nalsarovar. 
One Vahaan Padhar, a resident of Bavla, was convicted in a poaching case of 2018 from Nalsarovar, while three other accused persons were acquitted with the benefit of doubt.
The court held Padhar guilty and sentenced to three-year rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs 10,000, failure to pay which would increase the sentence by a year.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThose acquitted were Nana Padhar, Rajesh Padhar and Vishnu Padhar. Judicial magistrate first class Mehul Patel in his order observed that the forest department failed to prove if the other three were present at Nalsarovar at the time of the incident but had been able to establish that Vahaan was involved in the poaching of birds.
The court accepted the argument that Vahaan entered the prohibited area and indulged in poaching and was making financial gain by selling the birds. The court observed that “in this case the birds who cannot seek justice for themselves are involved and hence it was a sensitive case.”
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreThe court noted that the accused should be convicted so that an example is set to deter others from getting involved in such activities. The lawyer for Vahaan argued that he was forced to indulge in poaching as the residents of the area do not have any other source of livelihood.
The court stated that “it has come to the notice of the court that for the past several years, anti-social elements are involved in poaching of birds resulting in the death of migratory as well as local birds. 
The deaths due to humans cannot be tolerated. Nalsarovar is famous for its migratory birds that come to the lake. The court stated that if no action is taken for conservation and preservation of the lake it could damage the reputation of the country. The court believes if the accused was awarded the minimum sentence it would encourage such anti-socials elements.”
Forest officials said that in August 2018 they got a tip-off about poaching in Nalsarovar. Forest officials said three teams were formed and began a search. 
Forest officials intercepted Padhar and the three others, but they could only catch Padhar, while the other three managed to escape. The department recovered three lesser flamingos, a purple moorhen, two greater flamingos and a painted stork from a bag Padhar was carrying. The cops arrested the other three five days after this. The accused had used nylon thread, a kite, nets and poles to trap the birds.