Nagpur: Taking note of back-to-back cases of leopards getting entangled in jaw traps in the last eight days, principal chief conservator of forest (wildlife) Sunil Limaye has sounded an alert in the state.
TOI had on February 9 reported two cases of leopards getting trapped in steel-jaw traps, a known modus operandi of poachers belonging to Baheliya community from Katni in Madhya Pradesh.These organized gangs of poachers were active in the state in 2013 and the possibility of them staging a comeback cannot be ruled out.
Limaye on Wednesday asked all territorial chief conservators of forest (CCF) and field directors of tiger reserves to remain alert. He has asked the officials to get in touch with Melghat Cyber Cell and mobile network operators to know about suspicious operatives.
Deputy conservators and divisional forest officers have also been asked to take police help. Limaye has asked the forest officials to submit a report by February 17 on the issue.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreTwo leopards were rescued from jaw traps in the last five days. In the first case, a nine-year-old leopard was caught in the trap in Kakad Shivni on the farm owned by Prakash Kadam on February 4, 2022. The leopard was freed after tranquillizing and shifted to the rescue centre at Paratwada. 
In a similar incident on February 8, a one-year-old leopard was caught in a trap in Khodshi in Karad in Western Maharashtra. The sub-adult animal was rescued by a forest team and the jaw trap was removed but its paw has been badly damaged due to deep wounds. 
The presence of Baheliyas is not new to the region. After crackdown by the forest department in 2012-2013, over 100 Baheliya poachers and their supporters were arrested. They had admitted to have targetted 25 tigers from Vidarbha alone. “It is possible these poachers may be operating through locals, who may be acting as sleeper cells,” said experts.
State wildlife board member Kundan Hate said, “The forest department has all the records about their hangouts from where they operated in the region. These areas should be monitored.”
“With tiger and leopard numbers going up in the state, big carnivores have been occupying areas where they were never seen before. Hence, the department machinery needs to remain more alert. Tiger cells in all the districts should be activated and police help should be taken,” Hate added.