Kolkata: The poaching of a Gangetic softshell turtle from Banabitan in Salt Lake’s Central Park was foiled by a birder on Sunday. The two men, allegedly trying to take the turtle out in a cement bag, had to let it go when the birder confronted them and refused to budge till it was set free.
While the forest department, which manages Banabitan, has initiated a probe, wildlife photographers highlighted how bird and wildlife enthusiasts helped in conservation.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThey urged the department to remove the fees imposed on camera that discouraged lenspersons from visiting Banabitan.
In a post on Facebook, birder Tamoghna Das Sharma said he saw a turtle while scouting for birds and also took its photos before walking away. When he returned to the spot around 25 minutes later, he found the turtle gone. Instead, he found two men, who looked like labourers, sitting on the ground. Beside them was a cement bag with a bulge that resembled the shape of a turtle. As he told the men to release the turtle, they feigned ignorance and called someone. After the call, they continued to bide time. Not one to budge, Das Sharma again asked them to release the turtle. When they did nothing, he took a photo. Flustered, the duo again called someone, dropped the turtle on the ground and left. 
Das Sharma picked up the turtle, which was dropped upside down on its shell, and placed it on the bank of a water body, from where it made its way into the water.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoDeputy conservator of forest Ram Badana said he had ordered an inquiry. “We are trying to contact Das Sharma for his statement. This has never happened before,” he said. But a birder said he had seen traps on Banabitan trees to catch parakeets. “Wildlife traders gained access to Banabitan at the cost of wildlife enthusiasts due to the forest department’s skewed policy,” said birder Navin Agarwal. Bird enthusiast and photographer Mitali Deb said the forest department’s fees of Rs 300 a person with cameras discouraged birders from entering Banabitan. “Their absence gave poachers and illegal animal traders the chance to fill the void,” she said.