Tesla CEO Elon Musk has announced that the company is increasing the compensation packages for the employees working on the AI engineering team. The billionaire explained that the pay raise was in response to OpenAI's attempts to poach the EV maker’s engineers.
Musk confirmed the same while responding to a recent report by The Information. According to the report, Tesla machine-learning scientist Ethan Knight was planning to join Musk's AI company, xAI.Top Picks For YouTesla CEO Elon Musk looks to solve one of the 'biggest issue' many users had with XTesla to look for locations to set up EV factory in India
In a recent post on his social media platform X (previously Twitter), Musk responded to OpenAI's hiring efforts by saying, “They have been aggressively recruiting Tesla engineers with massive compensation offers and have unfortunately been successful in a few cases.”
Musk wrote: "Ethan was going to join OpenAI, so it was either xAI or them," 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA Institute
The billionaire has also confirmed that “Tesla is increasing comp (contingent on progress milestones) of our AI engineering team.”

OpenAI has yet to share an official statement about the incident. 
AI talent war heats up

As tech companies race to become dominant players in the field of artificial intelligence, competition for AI talent has been on the rise. Apart from offering lucrative salaries, leaders of some major tech companies are reportedly trying to woo engineers personally. 

A recent report claimed that Facebook-parent Meta’s CEO Mark Zuckerberg has been writing personal emails to AI researchers at Google's DeepMind. The report also noted that the social media giant has even offered jobs to candidates without conducting any interviews.
Apart from Zuckerberg, Google co-founder Sergey Brin also reportedly called an employee who was thinking of leaving the tech giant for Microsoft-backed OpenAI. As per another report by The Information, Brin made several promises to convince the employee to stay, including offering a higher pay.
In another X post, Musk noted: “The talent war for AI is the craziest talent war I've ever seen!”