BHOPAL: In a landmark judgement, a special court in Sagar district of Madhya Pradesh has sentenced 13 poachers associated with an international syndicate to maximum imprisonment for poaching and smuggling of endangered pangolins and turtles.
They have been awarded 7 years’ jail with a penalty of Rs 20,000 to Rs 50,000 each. for the Madhya Pradesh forest department.
Thirty-seven individuals were named as accused in this case, of which eleven are from Hong Kong, Bangladesh, Thailand, Malaysia, Srilanka and Madagascar.Efforts are on to arrest foreign nationals through diplomatic channels.
Chief judicial magistrate (CJM) delivered the sentence. Case was registered by Madhya Pradesh Special Task Force Wildlife (also known as State Tiger Strike Force) at Sagar on May 5, 2017 to investigate confirmed inputs on poaching and smuggling of Pangolin scales and various turtle species, including one endemic to the Ganga basin, Red crown roofed turtle (Batagur Kachuga).
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoMPSTF (wildlife) headed by DCF Ritesh Sirothia, conducted massive investigations and booked 37 people involved in the poaching syndicate under various sections of Wild life (Protection) Act -1972. Sentences for crimes relating to the prohibited species of turtles are minimum three years and up to 7 years’ imprisonment and a fine of a minimum of 10000 rupees. 
Of total, 16 were arrested from Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. Remaining 21 are absconding. Seven arrested persons have been in jail since the last three years. Their bail requests are continuously rejected by a variety of courts, from district courts to high court to the Supreme Court. Out of 21 absconded accused, 10 are Indian citizens and 11 are foreign nationals.
The Trial Court has already issued arrest warrants against all 21 absconders. The Supreme Court in a bail matter directed the trial court for speedy trial following which CJM Sagar started hearing the case on a day to day basis. The High Court monitored the progress of the trial.
Sirothia and his team had confiscated a Mercedes Benz from one of the accused that was used for illegal transportation of turtles from Gwalior Agra to Chennai.
Out of 16 arrested accused, 12 are previously offenders. Some of them have multiple criminal records of involvement in crime of the same nature. This was the first case in which the forest department had issued a Lookout circular (LOC) for the accused.
Kingpin of the syndicate Manni Murugushan had been arrested earlier at Swarnabhumi Airport by Thailand police in August 2012 as well as prohibited species of turtles. He never appeared in court after getting bail from Thai Court and later Thai Court issued an arrest warrant against him
Due to his fugitive status in Thailand, The Red Corner Notice (RCN) was issued by Interpol against him. Currently, his extradition proposal is with the Court of Extradition Magistrate recently appointed by the Ministry of External Affairs.
Special public prosecutors appointed to stake strong claim of STF in trial court. STF used the services of Senior Advocates in petitions filed before the Supreme Court and High Court.
Interpol praised STF for their meticulous investigation and arrest of big fish in the Turtle case. During investigation into illegal trade of turtles by members of the syndicate, STF produced bank statements and conducted financial investigations that proved crucial during trial. Crucial information was retrieved with the help of Intelligence Bureau, New Delhi and presented at court as evidence. 
With a smart and scientific investigation method, MPSTF examined data collected from alleged syndicate members' Facebook, Gmail and Yahoo accounts and call history records.
Poachers living near Ganga- Chambal rivers were arrested, followed by middlemen living near large towns such as Gwalior, Agra and Kanpur, the big traders in Kolkata and Chennai and then finally those operating from across international borders were arrested by STF. By arresting Poachers, local traders, couriers, big traders, and international smugglers, the STF broke the supply chain.
STF shared criminal dossiers with law enforcement agencies of respective countries and requested INTERPOL assistance to apprehend and arrest wanted foreign nationals.
Earlier, setting an example of fastest conviction in a tiger poaching case, five poachers were sentenced to a seven years jail term each by chief judicial magistrate (CJM) court in Hoshangabad district of Madhya Pradesh in 2017.
CJM awarded the sentence based on scientific evidence produced by special task force (STF) forest department’s wildlife wing led by Ritesh Sirothia. Convicts have also been slapped with a fine of Rs 1 lakhs each, failing to which they must undergo more time in jail. This is said to be the first conviction by a court specially designated for STF (wildlife) cases and the largest penalty in terms of punishment and fine as well. The tiger was shot at and injured in Betul’s Rathipur village on April 4, 2017.