Taiwanese authorities have cracked down on a Chinese company that supplies Apple products. The island country's authorities have alleged that it has been conducting business in Taiwan without following proper legal procedures. Additionally, officials have also accused the firm (which has already been sanctioned by the US) of engaging in unfair recruitment practices by actively targeting and attempting to lure away highly skilled tech workers from the country.
According to a report by the news agency Reuters, Taiwan's Ministry of Justice Investigation Bureau has named Luxshare Precision Industry as one of eight Chinese companies “that came to Taiwan to illegally engage in the poaching of our high-tech talents.” 
However, the report didn’t share the number of tech workers or how this company has been trying to lure away talent from the country.Top Picks For YouGoogle's first fully custom Tensor chip for Pixel 10 might be produced by TSMC, not SamsungWhat two of the world’s largest chip companies, ASML and TSMC, may do if China attacks TaiwanThese announcements were made after the officials a sweep this month of suspected illegal operations by Chinese tech companies.
Other companies that came under investigation

    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoAs per the report, the investigation bureau has also named video surveillance equipment maker Zhejiang Dahua Technology. In 2019, the US added the company to a blacklist over Beijing's treatment of Muslim minorities in the far western Chinese region of Xinjiang.
The officials have claimed that Zhejiang Dahua has set up "two private locations" in Taiwan. To bypass the investigation the company listed its employees as working for another company, the bureau said. Apart from this, the officials also shared no other details.
How China’s effort may be a threat to Taiwan

Taiwan is the home to chipmaker giant TSMC and accounts for the majority of the world's most advanced semiconductor manufacturing capacity. The country sees China's efforts as a threat to its chip expertise.

“The facilitators of relevant mainland China companies in Taiwan should not be under any illusions and challenge the determination to enforce the law resolutely crack down on illegal business operations and the poaching of talent,” the bureau said in a statement.
In 2022, Taiwanese prosecutors accused Luxshare of stealing commercial secrets from a Taiwanese competitor, Catcher Technology. The country also alleged Luxshare of poaching its workforce to win orders from Apple and said that it had charged 14 people for the same.