BHOPAL: Madhya Pradesh has lost yet another tiger to a deadly electric wire trap laid by poachers, this time near Pench Tiger Reserve in Seoni district.
The carcass of an adult tiger was found covered in hay in Bakrampath forest village, around 60km from the core area of Pench. A jungle patrol came across the decomposing carcass. All its organs were found intact. Two locals have been arrested under the Wildlife Protection Act
This is the third tiger death this year, and the second at the hands of poachers.The two other tiger deaths were reported in Kanha and Panna Tiger Reserves.
A week ago, a tiger and a female hyena were found dead in Panna, electrocuted by the same wire trap laid by poachers. Forest officials found the wires on the scene, a trap probably laid by poachers to hunt wild boar. None of the body parts had been removed, said forest officials. On January 2, a sub-adult tiger was found dead in Kanha.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoSix tigers have died in India less than two weeks into the new year, half of them in ‘Tiger State’ MP.
But it's not all grim news from tiger reserves. A video of a tigress and her four cubs in Pench has gone viral. This tigress has been identified as T15, the daughter of 'Collarwali' - a much-photographed tigress, named thus because it was the first in the park to be fitted with a radio collar.
Collarwali was also called 'super mom' and 'badi mata' for giving birth to 29 cubs in eight litters over 11 years - between 2008 and 2018. T15 was born in 2005. Officials say all four cubs are doing well and moving along with mother tigress.It's T15's third litter, and she too is turning out to be a 'super mom', say forest offices.
She has given birth to 20 cubs since her first litter in 2014. She delivered in 2016, 2018, 2020 and 2022. Fourteen out of her 16 cubs dispersed after adulthood. Insiders say that scarcity of funds is turning out to be a major problem in tiger management. NTCA has not given any funds to MP in the last nine months, say sources.
Activist Ajay Dubey accused forest department of being negligent. "They arrested four or five accused in the Panna poaching cases and jailed them without questioning them. Who are they trying to protect? Those arrested for hunting would have named their customers also," Dubey told TOI tnn