CHANDIGARH: After the municipal corporation (MC) election result threw up a hung house, all three political parties —AAP, Congress and BJP —are facing a new test: keeping their flock together.
As no political party got a full majority in the general house—AAP was first with 14 seats, BJP got 12, Congress eight and SAD one—the senior leadership of the three parties are busy keeping their winning candidates in one group through multiple means and maintaining constant liaison with them to prevent them getting poached by others before the crucial mayoral elections.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
In fact, debutant AAP on Tuesday accused BJP of trying to buy their three councillors who were also called for a meeting at a five-star hotel in the evening. They were given pep talks on maintaining “AAP tradition of sticking together and not leaving the party for money”. The local leadership of the party will also hold meeting of all newly-elected councillors with party’s national convener Arvind Kejriwal on Thursday in the city The Congress leadership held a meeting with its new councillors on Tuesday at its party office in sector 35. BJP national vice-president Saudan Singh had met all new party councillors on Monday, discussing mayoral election scenario. As the AAP has the having maximum number of the elected councillors, it is most worried. “We are in constant touch with our councillors,” said a party leader.
In a statement issued on Tuesday, Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal said people of Chandigarh had truly performed a miracle in the municipal elections. He said the results had dispelled the myths and misinformation spread by the opposition about AAP. “I remember 'political pundits' used to say after the 2017 election results that the AAP was not supported by the urban voters. But the victory of Chandigarh has proved this time the urban masses of Punjab will too stand by AAP with strength and confidence. The whole Punjab wants change. Like Delhi and Chandigarh, Punjab wants new faces and honest politics,” he said.