HYDERABAD: 'Nariyal paani layiyae (bring coconut water)' was the code between Cyberabad cops and the four Telangana Rashtra Samithi (TRS) MLAs for police to enter the Moinabad farmhouse and catch the three accused for offering crores to the MLAs to switch loyalties allegedly at the behest of BJP.
In the remand report submitted by Cyberabad police before the Anti-Corruption Bureau (ACB) court on Thursday night, police said they had pre-fixed three spy cameras inside the big hall at the farmhouse owned by Tandur MLA Pilot Rohith Reddy. Top Picks For YouTelangana: Was at farmhouse for puja, no scam, says Nanda KumarTelangana: Cash, contracts came with ED threat, say TRS MLAsPlea for remand of Telangana ‘poachers’ junked by court
Cops said they had also given a voice recorder to Rohith to record the conversation with the three accused - Ramachandra Bharati, Nanda Kumar and Simhayaji Swamy.

Apart from Rohith, the other three MLAs present were Guvvala Balaraju, Rega Kantha Rao and B Harshavardhan Reddy. Police also attached screenshots of purported phone chat between accused Bharati and some persons whose names were saved as Sunil Kumar Bansal BJP and Santosh BJP.

 The police, however, did not give any designations to these names. The verbatim reference of chat between Bharati and Bansal said: “Hari Aum Namasthe Bansal Ji. Need to talk with you important about Telangana. Please suggest some time where I can discuss (sic).” Another message between an accused and Santosh BJP said: “Total sitting 25 members are ready to join us, they are all in my circle only, without mistake plan is to join 40 members ASAP (sic).”

 Police also said that Bharati telephoned one Tushar during the conversation with TRS MLAs, which was recorded by Rohith. According to the complaint given by Rohith Reddy, “One Ramachandra Bharati of Delhi and Nanda Kumar met the complainant. They negotiated with him to join BJP and contest the next election as BJP candidate for which they offered `100 crore and central government civil contract.

If he did not join BJP, he was threatened with criminal cases and raids by ED and CBI.” For the other MLAs, they offered `50 crore for joining BJP, Rohith said. Nanda Kumar said that he went to the MLA's farmhouse to attend the puja. 
"I went there with Simhayaji for 'Samrajyalakshmi' puja. I do not know what information police had to arrest us. We have not done anything wrong. Police produced us before the judge and I believe that legal mechanism has won. I have nothing do with what Rohith Reddy has said or levelled other allegations. There is no scam," Nanda Kumar said. Police earlier moved a lunch motion petition in the high court challenging the ACB court's order.