JAIPUR/JAISALMER: As the race for Rajya Sabha polls hots up, Congress is moving all its legislators to a five-star hotel in Udaipur. Sources said the Congress MLAs and Independents are likely to be lodged at the same hotel in Udaipur where the top leadership and delegates stayed during the party's 'Chintan Shivir' last month.
Reports say that Jaipur Aadarsh Nagar MLA Rafeek Khan is in Udaipur to oversee the arrangements for the legislators. 
"On May 31, it was decided by the top leadership to shift the MLAs to the hotel/resort in order to prevent poaching by the BJP. Udaipur has been chosen as the top brass was satisfied with the privacy the hotel offered them during the three-day Chintan Shivir," said a source. The MLAs will be shifted in phases. 
"The first batch is likely to arrive on Thursday morning. Those who missed the first day of the two-day workshop are the ones in the first batch. The second and final batch will reach by Thursday evening or Friday," said the source.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreIt is clear that the MLAs will stay in Udaipur till June 9, a day before the polling on June 10. Other than 108 Congress MLAs, the party is claiming the support of 13 independent MLAa, 2 from CPI and one from RLD.
During a press conference on Wednesday, PCC chief Govind Singh Dotasra confirmed that all the 13 MLAs had attended the workshop at a private hotel in Jaipur. There were reports that Speaker CP Joshi too was in Udaipur for some personal reasons.
The Congress camp is on its feet after the BJP extended its support to media baron Subhash Chandra as an independent candidate in the RS polls. Sources said that the move by the BJP has forced Congress to make this move much earlier than they had planned earlier.
Both CM Ashok Gehlot and Dotasra expressed fears of horse-trading and cautioned that those indulging in it would face punitive action. The ruling party has high stakes in the polls as it has fielded central party leaders - Mukul Wasnik, Pramod Tiwari and Randeep Singh Surjewala, all from outside Rajasthan, for Rajya Sabha. At the same time, sources also said that the Congress was looking at a hotel in Jaisalmer as an alternative for its MLAs as it did during the rebellion by Sachin Pilot and 18 other Congress MLAs in 2020. Sources said rooms have been reserved for MLAs at Suryagarh Hotel in Jaisalmer from June 5-10. The district administration and the police are also on alert mode. The hotel manager has been told to reserve 40 rooms, sources said.