Nagpur: The Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB), an apex body under the environment ministry to combat organized wildlife crime, has arrested tiger skin and body parts trader Mishram Jakhad, 81, from Dwarka. Jakhad has been linked to the Gadchiroli tiger poaching cases.
WCCB officials said Jakhad controls and directs tiger poaching and illegal trade of tiger body parts.He not only sponsors the illegal trade syndicate but also earns huge money from the poachers and smugglers, and also blackmails them. According to sources, WCCB officials knew Jakhad as he used to share intelligence with them. The trader’s younger son had also worked with WCCB.
On July 31, 2023, the special investigating team (SIT) of WCCB along with the team from Gadchiroli raided the suspect’s premises. Jakhad was arrested with cash ₹14.8 lakh suspected to be linked to illegal trade in tiger parts.
During the search, an ID card was recovered from Jakhad showing that he has worked as field officer of the Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI). He confessed that he worked in the Delhi government’s wildlife wing. A case has been registered against Jakhad under various sections of Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, and he was produced before the court.
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoAfter the seizure of a tiger skin and 19kg bones from five poachers at Guwahati on June 28, the WCCB issued a red alert on June 29 to all tiger reserves and tiger-bearing areas to intensify patrolling and sanitize all above areas of hunting gangs.
The case was transferred by the Assam forest department to WCCB for investigation as it showed the involvement of multiple states. WCCB constituted an SIT to investigate the case. The preliminary interrogation of offenders showed that the tiger body parts came from Gadchiroli. These interrogation findings were shared by WCCB with the Maharashtra forest officials.
Based on WCCB inputs, 13 members of the Bawariya gang were arrested from Gadchiroli. Leg-hold traps and tiger body parts were also recovered from them. One of the offenders wanted in the Guwahati seizure case was also arrested from Gadchiroli.
Based on further interrogation of offenders arrested in Guwahati and Gadchiroli, and further investigations, Jakhad’s links were exposed. “The Enforcement Directorate (ED) will also be roped in for investigation of this offence under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002,” said WCCB officials.
Nitin Desai, WPSI director, Central India, said, “This man was introduced to us by two wildlife inspectors of the Delhi government. They requested us to give him a job. WPSI employed him as a field officer for three months.”
“Due to budget constraints, his services were terminated in 2010 We have no knowledge whatsoever of any illegal activities he might have carried out since then,” Desai said.