NEW DELHI: Delhi's deputy chief minister, Manish Sisodia, on Saturday produced an audio clip of an alleged BJP man purportedly discussing the party's bid to poach AAP MLAs and demanded Union home minister Amit Shah's arrest if he was involved in the matter. Sisodia sought an investigation into the entire matter by the Enforcement Directorate. There was no immediate reaction available from the Delhi BJP.
At a press conference, Sisodia played the audio tape and alleged that the BJP "dalal" (broker) heard in the clip was one of the three people arrested in Telangana over an alleged bid to poach MLAs of that state's governing TRS.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Sisodia said that on October 27, it came to light through the media that there was a raid in Telangana where three "brokers", who allegedly bought MLAs on behalf of the BJP, were caught red-handed with Rs 100 crore. 
He alleged that these brokers were trying to buy four TRS MLAs at a farmhouse in Telangana by offering them Rs 100 crore.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo"The shocking thing is that these brokers, who bought MLAs on behalf of the BJP, were clearly and openly saying that the MLAs who left the TRS will be introduced by them to 'Santosh ji' and the Number.2 'Shah ji' in the party. Along with this, the brokers mention that there is no need to worry about the CBI and ED, as they have been taken care of," Sisodia alleged.
The deputy CM went on to say that on October 29 another audio clip surfaced in which there is a conversation between an MLA of Telangana and these brokers. "In this clip, a broker reveals that they are trying to buy 43 MLAs in Delhi and get them to defect," Sisodia said while sharing the audio clip with reporters.
"It should also be investigated that these brokers are taking the names of 'Santosh ji' and 'Shah ji'. Are they referring to BJP leader BL Santosh and India's home minister Amit Shah? If the 'Shah' being referred to in the audio is Amit Shah, then it is a grave threat for the entire nation. This incident should first be investigated by the ED and Amit Shah should be arrested immediately for interrogation," the Delhi deputy chief minister said.