Guwahati: The Anti-Rhino Poaching Task Force at the Kaziranga National Park and Tiger Reserve (KNPTR) has advocated for vulnerability mapping of newer regions where the booming rhino population has been observed spreading out in the last couple of years. 
The surge in the rhino population has been attributed to the concerted efforts of the state govt and the new breeds are increasingly exploring fresh territories, including far-flung Bura Chapori and Majuli — miles away from the core area of the park that are connected by the Brahmaputra chaporis or sand bars.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe sprawling 1,300 square kilometre expanse of KNPTR boasts an astounding population of over 2,613 rhinos, accounting for an impressive 70% of the global one-horned rhino population.
These ventures by the rhinos are also increasing the animals’ vulnerability in the hands of poachers. Given the situation, the the task force is deliberating on strategies to bolster the anti-rhino poaching measures during its second meeting.
A KNPTR statement issued after the meeting said, “It is recommended that the vulnerability of the newer areas be mapped and the measures identified, including establishment of forest camps and patrolling routes.”
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoThe meeting was chaired by Assam special DGP Harmeet Singh and attended by senior police officials, including IGPs (Special Task Force and Central Range), SPs of rhino-bearing areas and senior forest officials like the field director of Kaziranga, other directors and DFOs. 
The primary agenda of the meeting was to assess the existing rhino protection measures, forest-police coordination, deployment of existing forest protection forces and reinforcement of the intelligence networks.
Regular coordination meetings in all rhino-bearing areas were also advised to be conducted at the district level to enhance operational capabilities, the statement said. 
The task force further recommended including additional members in the committee, including IGPs (Central Range, Northern Range, Eastern Range), DFOs from Nagaon, Golaghat, Jorhat territorial divisions and the commandants of the Assam Forest Protection Force for greater coordination and surveillance.
In a remarkable feat, KNPTR accomplished zero rhino poaching incidents in 2022, marking the first such occurrence in a calendar year since 1977, a testament to the park’s unwavering commitment to wildlife conservation. But this year in January, a solitary rhinoceros fell victim to the nefarious activities of poachers, an incident that has galvanized the park authorities into a state of heightened vigilance. 
In a recent development last week, a poacher was killed during an early-morning operation conducted by the forest force, which involved a fierce exchange of gunfire with a gang of poachers within the confines of KNPTR. This incident has once again triggered alarm bells, underscoring the persistent vulnerability of the rhino population residing in the park.