HYDERABAD: Kamareddy police arrested a Hyderabad businessman and five others for hunting two spotted deer in Polkampet forest area, around 130 km from Hyderabad, in the early hours of Saturday. Three locals who helped the accused, however, managed to give police the slip.
While key accused Mohammed Hameed Uzzaman, who has a licensed sports rifle, was nabbed close to the spot where the deer were shot, five of his accomplices were caught by cops after a 100 km chase in the jungle.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoUzzaman, a Hyderabad-based businessman, runs a job consultancy.
At around 4 am, Lingampet police station constables, P Shankar and Ch Rammohan, along with home guard Vasanth noticed suspicious movement of two cars in Polkampet area. The cops had gone to Ailapur village where three persons had drowned on Friday to supervise the retrieval of bodies.
"They spotted the two cars and asked the drivers to stop. Instead of stopping, the cars sped away. The cops' team gave a chase and alerted nearby police stations," Kamareddy district SP B Srinivasa Reddy said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreSoon, police noticed that one of the cars was abandoned on the road near a rice mill in the village. "There was no one in the car. Our team found chopped body parts of two spotted deer stuffed in the luggage boot," the SP said.
The police team also spotted Hameed with a rifle and immediately took him into custody. He confessed to the cops of hunting the deer with his licensed sports rifle. "Hameed confessed to killing the deer with the assistance of five of his associates from Hyderabad and three local helpers. Hameed runs a job consultancy. We seized the weapon and three live rounds," the SP said.
The accused said that they hunted the deer for its meat. "But, we will verify their claims," Reddy said.
To zero in on the other accused who fled from the spot in another car, police set up checkpoints in the surrounding areas. At around 6 am, the second car with five other accused — Mohammed Obaid Khan of Malakpet, Meer Musthafa Ali of Charminar, Farzan Ghulam Hussain of Falaknuma, Syed Raheel of Kamatipura and Mir Tayyab Ali of Puranapul — was spotted at Fareedpet in Machareddy mandal after police teams chased them for over 100 km.
Three locals — Ramavath Pandu and Badya Bhoda and their associate who is yet to be identified — made good their escape on a two-wheeler. Police launched a manhunt to nab them.
Kamareddy district forest officer Nikitha Boga said a case was registered against the accused under the Telangana Forest act, Wildlife Protection Act, Arms Act, Biodiversity Act and IPC sections of criminal trespass and mischief by killing or poisoning or maiming or rendering useless any animal.