BENGALURU: Last Saturday, forest officials in Chitradurga district seized 1.5kg of pangolin scales from a poacher who would sniff out the endangered animal from its burrow without dogs' help. Ramappa, aged about 60, and his team of three were hunting and capturing pangolins to profit from their scales. 
Ramappa's case shocked officials, who claimed to have never witnessed a scenario where instead of using trained dogs, a poacher relied on his own olfactory senses and other habitat indicators to locate pangolins.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoIn November, foresters detected three cases of pangolin poaching in Chitradurga and one each in Ballari and Mysuru. 
Activists say there could be more but complain that many officials tend to ignore pangolin poaching because of the nature of the animal and the low volume of seized scales. The accused will be prosecuted under the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972.
What are pangolins like? 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MorePangolins are small-sized endangered creatures that are harmless to human beings and are known to be shy, solitary and nocturnal. They don't bite or attack when approached but merely slither their tongues. However, they are easy to dominate and capture. The animal is known to be an excellent digger.
Why are they poached? 
The animal is poached for three reasons - meat consumption, Chinese medicine and fashion. Some local groups hunt and eat pangolins, whereas some hunt them to profit from their scales, or both. In Ramappa's case, forest officials found that his gang had captured an adult pangolin and her cub, ripped off their scales, boiled the bodies and consumed the meat. They were preparing to sell the scales when they were caught. 
The animal's scales are a common ingredient in traditional Chinese medicine but are also used by the fashion industry to make statement clothes.
Where they're found in K'taka 
Most pangolins are said to be found near the Andhra Pradesh border in the districts of Chitradurga, Davanagere and Ballari. Some are found in Chikkamagaluru too. They have no specific type of habitat and can be found in tropical forests, agricultural fields or grasslands.