GUWAHATI: In view of the National Green Tribunal’s (NGT) directions on limiting vehicle speed to 40 KMPH and to ensure the accident-free movement of animals crossing the nine designated animal corridors of the Kaziranga National Park (KNP) in the rainy season, the forest department has installed animal sensor cameras to track speeding vehicles on NH 37 that bisects the park.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
These cameras are equipped with Automatic Number Plate Recognizing (ANPR) systems with radar in order to detect vehicular speed in park areas. 
“The sensor cameras have been installed in nine animal corridors of the KNP, stretching from Rangalu to Borjuri and will be operational with effect from Friday,” said DFO, Eastern Assam Wildlife Division, Ramesh Kumar Gogoi. Deer, in particular, killed while crossing the highway during floods.
As per the NGT orders, the vehicles plying at a speed above 40 KMPH will be penalized with a fine. Further, Gogoi said, over-speeding on the same stretch will also be considered violation of provisions under section 144 of the CrPC. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteHe informed that every vehicle hauled up for over-speeding and killing or injuring animals would be fined on environmental compensation of Rs 5,000 per incident over and above the amount to be paid for offence under the Motor Vehicles Act.
KNP is home to the world-famous one-horned rhino, but numerous other species of wildlife, including the hog deer, which has the highest 35,000 odd population and is vulnerable to accidents while crossing the highway towards the southern boundary of the park, are also found here in abundance. 
Ensuring the smooth movement of animals between Kaziranga and the forests of the Karbi Anglong is vital as this zone has been a critical feeding ground for herbivores. Wildlife activists have been demanding the state government take urgent action to free all the nine identified animal corridors of KNP.
The park now has a total of 144 man-made highlands, including 33 large shelters, but they are not enough to house all the animals when the floodwaters start rising. The animals, while escaping the floods, also fall prey to poaching. They are killed for their meat or body parts for sale in the illegal market.