Nagpur: Even as the state forest department managed to keep the organized gangs of poachers at bay after a major crackdown in 2013, there is no let-up in poaching of tigers and leopards in the state. In over three years, 24 tigers and 57 leopards have been poached in the state.
Though the number of tiger and leopard deaths may be quite higher, the information sought by social activist Abhay Kolarkar between January 2018 till September 2021 was only related to poaching.It reveals 24 tigers and 57 leopards died mostly due to poisoning, electrocution and getting trapped in wire snares.
“Though information sought was from January 1, 2018, till September 2021, the number of poaching cases has actually been reported in 36 months only. In December 2018, 3 tigers died followed by 6 in 2019, 8 in 2020 and 7 in the first four months of 2021,” says Kolarkar.
Similarly, 6 leopards were poached in 2018, followed by 17 in 2019, 29 in 2020 and 5 in the last eight months this year. There is a spurt in the poaching of leopards as compared to tigers.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreKolarkar said the forest department did not have information related to the number of wild animals killed. It also did not provide information related to the number of accused arrested in poaching cases and the status of wildlife crime cases. The wildlife wing has set up a wildlife crime cell recently at Nagpur.
Nitin Desai, Central India director of Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI), said, “Leopard distribution is spread in the entire state and hence the number of poaching cases are high as compared to tigers, whose numbers are mostly concentrated in Vidarbha region.”
Desai added, “These are the cases of opportunistic poaching where people must have either laid live wires to electrify the farm fence to protect crops or to kill herbivores for bushmeat. A carnivore must have come in contact and died. Deaths due to poisoning also show retaliation.” 
Meanwhile, Kolarkar said information was sought last month and it includes poaching cases till April 25, 2021, for both leopards and tigers. “However, the number of big cats poached may be higher as it does not include multiple seizures of leopard and tiger body parts recently. Moreover, 50% of the leopard deaths are attributed to road hits that go uninvestigated. In Western Maharashtra there are incidents of leopard shooting which is banned,” said Kolarkar.
Since July, forest officials of Nagpur division have arrested more than 30 accused and seized leopard and tiger body parts, including skin, bones, claws, canines, whiskers, etc from Nagpur and Chandrapur districts. Some more poachers were arrested in raids in Karad and Pune in Western Maharashtra.