Nagpur: In a puzzling case, Bramhapuri forest officials have arrested a con man, who acted as a forest department informer and also abetted poaching of tigers and leopards.
The accused, Nandkishore Pimple aka Jai Shree Ram Maharaj (50), was dramatically arrested on Monday evening from Gondpipri in Chandrapur district after five accused involved in poaching and trafficking leopard body parts revealed his name.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
On February 9, a joint team of Nagpur and Bhandara forest officials had arrested one Rangnath Shankar Mathere (35) from Torgaon in Bramhapuri tehsil. They seized 21 leopard whiskers, 13 nails, and 12 canines from him. After registering an offence under the Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972, the case was handed over to Bramhapuri officials, who arrested four more persons.
All the accused in their confession statements admitted they were encouraged to enter poaching as Jai Shree Ram Maharaj told them he would double their money by “raining money from the roof by performing black magic”.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo“Pimple is also said to have collected Rs1.10 lakh from all the accused separately. The relatives of the arrested accused created ruckus demanding their money back by arresting the said con man,” sources told TOI.
Stunned by the revelations, forest staff reached Pimple’s house at Chandrapur but he was missing. They tracked his phone through the cyber cell and arrested him from his father-in-law’s house near Gondpipri. After arrest, Pimple pretended to develop health complications. He was produced before JMFC Nagbhid, who remanded him to MCR for five days.
Talking to TOI, Bramhapuri deputy conservator of forest (DyCF) Dipesh Malhotra confirmed Pimple has been arrested based on the confession statements of all accused. They said that Pimple took money from them with a promise of doubling it. He refused to go into details of the case.
Forest sources told TOI Pimple is the same person who helped Nagpur forest officials crack 10-12 cases of leopard and tiger skin and body parts seizures, in which at least 85 accused were arrested in the last seven months. Most of the traps were laid under the Butibori forest range even as poaching cases related to Chandrapur and Yavatmal districts.
“Pimple used to operate on nine sim cards. His modus operandi was to play both, poachers and the forest department. He first encouraged locals to get tiger and leopard body parts by promising handsome gains. We are puzzled that when there is no demand for skin and body parts in the international market, he created a local market to make money,” they said.
“On occasions, he was seen transporting accused in his vehicle and used to trap them by informing the forest teams. He earned money from both, the forest department as well as the accused,” said senior forests officials seeking anonymity.
They said though no tiger or leopard body parts were seized from Pimple, he will be booked as co-accused for abetting wildlife crime. Earlier, in February 2019, Pimple had been arrested in a similar case by the Telangana forest department.