BHUBANESWAR: Police on Thursday arrested three suspended forest department officials in connection with the murder of Turam Purty, a lone witness of poaching and burning of an elephant in Mayurbhanj district's Similipal Tiger Reserve in December last year. 
Shiba Sankar Samal, ranger-in-charge of Jenabil range, Chandrabhanu Behera, forester of Gurandia beat house and Binod Kumar Das, forest guard of Special Tiger Protection Force (STPF) were under suspension after the burning of an elephant carcass to destroy evidence. 
"The trio had allegedly forced Purty to consume poison," one official said.
They were arrested under section 302 (punishment for murder) and 34 (Acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention) of Indian Penal Code (IPC), said police sources. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteSudarsan Gangoi, Karanjia sub-divisional police officer, said the forest department had lodged cases against these three staff before. They were arrested and released on bail. After the death of Purty, the three accused were hiding in Bhubaneswar. After getting information from reliable sources, the three suspended staff of the forest department were apprehended late on Wednesday night. After arrest, they were forwarded to court on Thursday, he added. 
He said the wife of Purty had lodged a complaint against these three staff for killing her husband. She had mentioned names of these three persons. According to the FIR, Purty was severely beaten by these three forest department staff. Later they allegedly forced the deceased to drink poison, he added.
 Sources said the carcass of a young tusker was burnt by these three staff on December 8. On December 13, the forest departments wildlife wing had lodged a case against these three suspended forest personnel under the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 in connection with the secret burning of the carcass of the elephant.
The trio had suspected Purty, a contractual worker of the forest department, for leaking out the information to higher authorities related to the burning of an elephant carcass.