PATNA: A day after five of its six MLAs in Manipur defected to BJP, the JD(U) on Saturday accused its former ally of using "dhan bal" (money power) to poach legislators from other parties. JD(U)'s de facto leader and Bihar CM Nitish Kumar questioned the propriety and constitutionality of the alleged poaching by the BJP.
The Manipur incident was as a major embarrassment for the JD(U) a day before its national executive meeting in Patna on Saturday to project Nitish for a bigger role in national politics.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Responding to media queries at the JD(U) office here, Nitish asked whether it was proper to take MLAs of other party. "Is it proper? Is it constitutional? Is it in line with established norms?" he asked and called upon all political parties to unite against the BJP in 2024 for a "positive" result. 
"All his six party MLAs from Manipur had arrived here a day after winning the election in March. They again came here this month soon after we formed the new government with the Grand Alliance. All six MLAs supported our decision. ... Just see how the BJP is 'attracting' MLAs of other parties towards it," Nitish said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo"When we were in the NDA and the six JD(U) MLAs were supporting the BJP government in Manipur, they (BJP) didn't give any post to them. But now, they have taken our MLAs in their party. Just think what kind of politics is going on. What type of behaviour is this?" Nitish asked. 
"On Monday, all six MLAs informed us that they were coming to Patna to join the party's national executive and council meets. But in the meantime, they 'caught' our MLAs and took them in their fold," the Bihar CM said. 
JD(U) had won six seats in Manipur assembly polls in March this year, its highest so far. Now, Muhammad Abdul Nasir from Lilong seat remains the only JD(U) MLA in Manipur.
"Our MLAs in Manipur had defeated BJP candidates in the assembly polls. Earlier in December 2020, our six MLAs in Arunachal Pradesh were poached by the BJP in similar fashion while we were still in the NDA. In Arunachal, too, our MLAs had defeated the BJP candidates," JD(U) national president Rajeev Ranjan alias Lalan Singh said. "Whatever tricks and game the BJP may play, it will not be able to stop JD(U) from becoming a national party by 2023," he said. 
Currently, JD(U) is recognised as 'state party' in Bihar, Arunachal Pradesh and Manipur. 
If it secures 6% of the votes polled in one more state, it would be recognised as a 'national party' by the Election Commission.JD(U) hopes to secure more than 6% votes in Nagaland polls in early 2023.