HYDERABAD: In a major blow to the claims of Cyberabad police, who arrested three persons for allegedly trying to lure four TRS MLAs into BJP fold by offering them crores of rupees of cash and other benefits, a local ACB special court on Thursday night rejected the remand of the accused.
Police let off the accused after serving them notices under section 41-a of CrPC to appear before the investigating officer for questioning.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoCyberabad police said that lack of any cash seizure was the main reason for rejection of remand and they would seek legal opinion on how to proceed further with the case. 
Earlier, senior Cyberabad police officials claimed to have recovered a list of 55 TRS MLAs from the three men arrested for allegedly trying to lure four TRS MLAs to defect to the BJP. Although the officials refused to give more details, they claimed that they would make the list part of the evidence to strengthen their case against the accused.
Officials added it was not immediately clear if the MLAs in the list had already been contacted or the three men were in the process of contacting. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA Institute The cops have charged the accused with criminal conspiracy, bribery, attempting to bribe a public servant and under sections of the Prevention of Corruption Act in the FIR. After interrogation, the officials produced them before an ACB special court judge for judicial remand. 
The officials told the court that they had audio-visual recordings and messages as evidence. Four cell phones seized from the trio also contain some evidence, they claimed. Based on a complaint by Rohith Reddy, the police registered the case against Ramachandra Bharathi, Nanda Kumar and Simhayaji. 
The complaint said that Bharati and Nanda Kumar, who belong to BJP, met Reddy on September 26 and negotiated a deal for him to resign from TRS and join BJP. Reddy alleged that the duo had asked him to contest as BJP candidate in the next elections and offered him Rs 100 crore and contracts. 
He added that he turned down the proposal, but on Wednesday, they again contacted him, wanting to meet him at his farmhouse in Moinabad. "The accused asked Rohit Reddy to mobilise other TRS MLAs so that they can offer them bribes of Rs 50 crore each to join BJP," the FIR mentioned. Based on the complaint, the police raided the farmhouse on Wednesday. 
Police officials, who interrogated the accused, claim that in Nanda Kumar's cell phone they found messages sent to Bharathi. They apparently mentioned that certain TRS MLAs were willing to defect and how much a certain MLA wants for defection. Biodatas of MLAs were sent, advising Bharathi to contact them.