PILIBHIT: Reckless poaching and illegal trade have pushed 25 of 29 native turtle species into the “red zone”, posing serious threat to its survival in the country, as per data provided by Traffic India, a UK based wildlife trade monitoring network of the International Union for Conservation of Nature(IUCN).
Some of these endangered turtle species are being smuggled mainly via UP and West Bengal — states sharing borders with Nepal, Bangladesh and the Northeast.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoAirports of Mumbai, Chennai and Bengaluru are also considered major entry and exit points. “As we mark World Turtle Day on May 23, we are witnessing certain disturbing facts. IUCN has enlisted 25 of the 29 species — two tortoises and the rest freshwater turtles — on its red list in India.
 Several other species have been put under schedule I ofthe Indian Wildlife Protection Act. The red-crowned roofed turtle has been classified critically endangered,” said Merwyn Fernandes, coordinator of Traffic India.
Fernandes pointed out that “at least 1,11,310 tortoises and freshwater turtles” were found to be part of the illegal trade in 19 states and two UTs in India between September 2009 and 2019, and over 11,000 people might be involved every year in this network.
“UP and Bengal account for over 60% of all seizures. Among 14 native species found to be traded, Indian star tortoise accounted for 49%, followed by Indian softshell turtle (26%), Indian flapshell turtle (15%) and spotted pond turtle (9%),” Fernandes said.
Sreeparna Dutta, project biologist at Turtle Survival Alliance, a US-based outfit, said, “Over 9,000 freshwater turtles were seized in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Bengal between August 2020 and February 2021. In fact, 17 districts in UP registered record seizures. Regions of Etawah Mainpuri-Agra, Sultanpur, Pratapgarh-Amethi, Unnao Kanpur and Gonda-Bahraich-Pilibhit have emerged as key points in UP. ”
Dutta further said, “Rail and roads near the Ganga and Mahanadi basin are preferred routes for smugglers. They use turtles for meat, traditional medicine, black magic and as pets. ”