NEW DELHI: Talking to his party councillors for the first time since MCD election early this week, chief minister Arvind Kejriwal cautioned them against getting involved in malpractices and asked them to increase trust levels with the public.
Addressing them at a function, which was attended by all 134 newly elected MCD members, MLAs and district office bearers, Kejriwal said the councillors should work hard to "repay the debt" of the public who elected them to MCD.
"People are tired of BJP's corruption in MCD. Don't get greedy that this five-year term becomes your last in public life. If you work honestly, people will stand with you," Kejriwal said.
"This time, we have fought against the corruption by BJP. It should not happen that BJP will fight an election against our corruption next time," the AAP national convener further said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreHe also cautioned his party councillors to be watchful against any attempts of poaching made by BJP and advised them to record any conversations if someone attempted to lure them. "They may try to buy you now. People have started to get calls, but I know no one among you will be swayed away," Kejriwal added.
In a hard-fought election, AAP got 134 seats while BJP got 104 and Congress won nine. Three independent candidates were also elected to the reunified corporation.
Kejriwal said the 2022 MCD polls were the toughest election fought by AAP as BJP used entire machinery and various conspiracies against them. He said the BJP deployed seven chief ministers, 17 union ministers, BJP national president and the home minister in the campaign and also released videos and got letters written by a jailed conman apart from registering fake cases against his ministers.
"Despite BJP trying to spoil our honest image, people could not be fooled. We have won the hearts of people through our conduct," Kejriwal added.
The chief minister suggested that the councillors should work in close tandem with MLAs and also, advised the latter to not get insecure. He said that even if the two have any grievances against each other, they should bury them and forgive each other. "Both MLA and councillors should work together. We have to work together against corruption, garbage and social ills," Kejriwal said.
Reminding them about the promises made to the electorate of getting Delhi rid of the problem of garbage, Kejriwal said it was important for the councillors to make friends with sanitation workers. "Make them a part of your family. We will ensure they get timely salaries. If we make them friends, they will help us in cleaning Delhi," the chief minister said.
The party also deputed four senior leaders and gave them three zones each to coordinate with newly elected councillors, hold meetings and visit their areas to understand the problems faced by local residents. While AAP leader Adil Khan will be in charge of Civil Lines, Rohini and Najafgarh, MLA Saurabh Bhardwaj will oversee Narela, Keshavpuram and West Zone, Durgesh Pathak will oversee Sadar, Karol Bagh and Shahdara North and Central, South and Shahdara South will be with Atishi.