Nagpur: Wardha forest officials have cracked the tiger poaching case in Samudrapur forest range of Wardha division and have seized 17 claws and 4 canines from the accused farmer in whose farm fence the tiger was electrocuted.
The accused, identified as Avinash Bharat Soyam (34) of Mahalgaon (Khurd) in Warora tehsil, has been arrested for electrifying a farm fence that led to the killing of the tiger.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoSoyam’s farm is on the edge where the boundary of the Warora tehsil ends. Hence, to dodge the authorities, the accused tried to create the impression that the tiger was killed in Wardha division jurisdiction and that he had no role in the poaching.
The disfigured tiger carcass was first noticed by a shepherd on August 11 but the animal was killed around August 4-5. After finding the dead tiger, Soyam, with the help of his accomplices, cut it into 14 pieces and removed vital body parts like claws and canines, and dumped the pieces in a nullah in zudpi jungle survey number 57 in Kora beat.
Assistant conservator of forests Amarjit Pawar said, “On Wednesday, our team raided Soyam’s farm and seized the tiger body parts hidden underground. Two more accused allegedly involved in trading the body parts are on the radar of the investigating team. Soyam’s forest custody has been extended by the JMFC, Samudrapur, till August 22.”
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoWardha deputy conservator of forests Rakesh Sepat said, “Soyam and two other absconding accused were regularly involved in electrocuting herbivores approaching the farm. The accused used to draw electricity illegally from the main power line to electrify the farm fence.”
Sepat added, “One of the accused is said to be involved in selling illicit liquor. They took advantage of their farms being on the edge of the forest, which connects territorial ranges of Warora, Bhadravati, Khadsangi and Chimur ranges, and further to the Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve.”