Mysuru: Union minister on environment, forest and climate change Bhupender Yadav on Sunday stated that while being a national imperative, India also has a responsibility to secure the future of big cats across the globe. We need to collaborate at the highest levels of government to address this serious issue, he stated.
Addressing a technical session on global status of tiger conservation and updates from big cat range countries, at the golden jubilee celebrations of the Project Tiger at KSOU, he stated that India is tirelessly working with all big cat range countries towards nurturing conservation of species.We hope to continue our efforts to address issues of mutual concern for big cat conservation globally, he stated. Strong tiger governance and holistic tiger reserve management in India have resulted in the country becoming one of the global leaders in tiger conservation. India supports 70% of the world's wild tigers and the population is increasing at an annual rate of 6%. India has a long standing and successful track record of protecting its tigers, he explained. Project Tiger has grown from nine tiger reserves to 53 tiger reserves, providing a safe haven for not only the flagship species but also other endangered plants and animals in the past 50 years, Yadav said. “We have zero tolerance towards tiger poaching. The project's scale of implementation and the diverse habitats under its coverage are unparalleled in the contemporary world. Project Tiger has been instrumental in putting the endangered tiger on a definite path of recovery. It has saved the species from extinction and improved the protection and status of its habitat, ensuring the survival of tigers for scientific, economic, aesthetic, cultural, and ecological values,” he said.
Recovery of Gir lions from less than 20 individuals to around 700 individuals within a span of a century is an enigma, he explained.
Speaking on the occasion, representatives of several countries hailed India's role in conserving the big cats. They also discussed the future challenges, including impact of climate change, increasing human-wildlife conflict, mining activities in tiger habitats.