Nagpur: Following clues from the Assam tiger skin seizure case, Maharashtra forest officials nabbed 11 members, including five women, of organized gangs of tiger poachers hailing from Haryana in a swoop on a camp at Ambe Shivni, 15km from Gadchiroli, at 2am on Sunday.
The teams seized seven steel jaw traps, weapons used to kill tigers, three tiger claws, Rs46,000 in cash, cell phones, and other incriminating material.The gang members were selling cloth bags, and staying in the area for the last one year, with forest officials clueless.
It was only after a tiger skin seizure in Assam on June 28 that the racket came to light. The skin was from the forest on the Gadchiroli-Chandrapur border. Investigators fear at least 8-10 tigers must have been poached by these ‘Kalla’ and ‘Rumali’ gangs. 
The arrests may be the biggest action against tiger poachers since 2013, when 60-70 poachers of Baheliya gangs from Katni in MP were arrested for killing at least 30 tigers from Vidarbha forests in 2012-13.
The gangs from Haryana and Punjab have spread their network in tiger reserve landscapes and territorial forests across the country. Currently, the gangs are operating in MP, Telangana and Vidarbha. The gang was planning to target tigers in Tadoba buffer and Melghat Tiger Reserve.
Their call details have been traced to Delhi, Himachal, Bihar, Haryana, Kolkata, Rajasthan, Assam, Siliguri, and other states. Of the 11 accused, one was arrested from Telangana and one from Dhule.
Forest sources said among those arrested is the kingpin Sonu Singh Bawaria, who trained under his father late Ranjit Singh Bawaria, also a notorious poacher, convicted for poaching cases in Melghat in 2013. Sonu was wanted by the CBI in tiger skin trafficking cases in 2009. Ranjit Singh was the right hand of infamous tiger poacher late Sansar Chand.
PCCF (wildlife) Maheep Gupta said, “The poachers arrested in Assam gave information leading to the arrests in Gadchiroli in a joint action by police, STPF, and forest teams from Melghat, Chandrapur, and Gadchiroli.”
Gupta had sent a team led by TATR deputy director Nandkishore Kale on July 18 to Assam to interrogate arrested tiger poachers. “Further investigations are on. We are also deploying the dog squad for combing operations. We will leave no stone unturned. A special investigation team (SIT) has been constituted,” said Gupta.
He added, “Now that the picture is clear, our team in Assam will register a preliminary offence report (POR) and bring the accused here in transit custody.”
The case has been handed over to Gadchiroli, and forest officials will produce them in local court on Monday. However, wildlife experts say the case should have been handled by the Chandrapur forest officials, who have experience in handling such cases.
Tadoba CF & field director Dr Jitendra Ramgaonkar said, “Based on preliminary information, we believe the arrest of these accused has averted major poaching incidents planned by the gang in this season.”
Wildlife experts said, “If tigers in a particular area go missing, patrolling staff should report. Poachers were staying for more than a year in Gadchiroli, why were musafir registers and camps not checked in tiger-sensitive areas?” 
BOX
LESSONS NOT LEARNT
* Tiger Cells Defunct: Tiger cells constituted under SP, however, there is no coordination, and meetings are not held regularly
* WCCB Role: Maharashtra has regional centre of WCCB. But it failed to gather information about poaching gangs
* NGOs Failure: Scores of local NGOs working in information-gathering arena also failed
* Forest Ministry: Monitoring and supervising is main work of senior officers. However, forest department is busy distributing land for projects
* Experience Failed: In 2013, after a major poaching racket, SOP was issued but has never been followed
* No Conflict: In Gadchiroli, man-animal conflict cases have come to zero, indicating tigers have been removed