BENGALURU: The governing Congress in Karnataka is looking to enhance its prospects in the 2024 Lok Sabha elections through its "Operation Hastha", which involves "poaching" BJP and JD(S) leaders, including some incumbent MLAs from the rival parties.
This strategic move is expected to not only bolster Congress's chances in the long-awaited local body elections, including the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) council and zilla and taluk panchayats, but also potentially influence the political landscape.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoHowever, the BBMP polls could face further delays as BJP is contemplating legal action over the new ward delimitation exercise.
Adding substance to the speculation of a large-scale defection, JD(S) functionary and former MLC Ayanur Manjunath met Karnataka Congress president DK Shivakumar at his Bengaluru residence on Sunday.
Shivakumar later commented: "Many people meet me. They have their own plans to advance their careers, which I cannot disclose. While we have the numerical strength and do not necessarily require inducting functionaries from other parties, some individuals have decided to align with us to safeguard the country from misrule. I cannot prevent those who wish to join our party."
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe focal point of this operation remains on the current BJP MLAs, including ST Somashekhar (Yeshwantpur), K Gopalaiah (Mahalakshmi Layout), Byrathi Basavaraj (KR Puram), Muniratna (RR Nagar) - all representing Bengaluru constituencies - and A Shivaram Hebbar (Yellapur). There is also a purported group of JD(S) legislators who are believed to be in contact with Congress functionaries.
Insiders involved in "Operation Hastha" within Congress explained that the primary aim is to bolster the party's chances of securing victories and increasing its vote share in upcoming elections, most notably the parliamentary polls of next year. Congress has set an ambitious target of capturing at least 20 of the 28 Lok Sabha seats in Karnataka.
For instance, there are considerations to field Somashekar as the Congress candidate for the Bengaluru North Lok Sabha consitunecy, which the party has not won in two decades. There's also speculation regarding the potential candidacy of BJP functionary V Somanna, who may contest from the Tumakuru seat on a Congress ticket.