CHANDIGARH: The Haryana Congress on Wednesday poached three former legislators, a sitting civic body chairman, a former MC head, and nearly a dozen current and former councillors from the BJP-JJP, INLD, and BSP, claiming to have hurt the govering combine the most.
They joined the Congress in the presence of state’s leader of opposition Bhupinder Singh Hooda, state party president Udai Bhan, and Rajya Sabha MP Deepender Hooda.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoProminent entrants were Colonel Raghubir Singh Chhillar (Indian National Lok Dal), former MLA of Badhra (Bhiwani) Nripender Singh of the Bharatiya Janata Party, former MLA of Guhla Cheeka (Kaithal) and BJP state executive member Phool Singh Khedi, Jannayak Janta Party national secretary and former Faridabad district president Thakur Raja Ram Singh, Julana municipality chairman Jasbir (BJP), BJP Mahila Morcha’s state executive member from Narwana and former Jind district secretary Suman Bedi, and Barwala municipality’s former chairman Hemraj Gudal.
The new entrants expressed faith in the policies of the Congress. Hooda welcomed them to the party and claimed that Haryana’s current coalition government will be voted out in a few months. Former Union minister Jai Prakash, former state minister Ashok Arora, and former MP Sushil Indora were present.
Hooda said that the Lok Sabha elections were due in 8 months and their dates will come out by March. He said: “The CM is in favour of holding the assembly and parliamentary elections together. If his proposal is accepted, it means that we have only 8 months for the Vidhan Sabha polls. Many more members from the BJP and JJP are in contact with us and eager to switch.”
Deepender said in nine months, 29 former MLAs of rival parties had joined Congress and most of them were from BJP-JJP coalition. “Our organisation is getting stronger in villages, while BJP’s rural structure is on paper,” he added.