Nagpur: At a time when the district tiger cell meeting on Tuesday was discussing increasing wildlife crime cases, the news of tiger poaching in the buffer zone of Pench Tiger Reserve (PTR) has sent ripples in the wildlife circles.
Nagalwadi RFO Pravin Lele on November 28 evening had received a tip-off that a tiger had been killed and it was disposed of after removing body parts.
On Tuesday morning, the carcass of a full-grown tiger that was buried in the farm in Surewani in the Nagalwadi range was unearthed by Pench staff. 
“Two paws and other body parts were found missing. Three persons from Surewani were arrested and remanded to forest custody,” said Pench deputy director Prabhu Nath Shukla.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoSources said a few days ago the tiger had killed a chital on the farm of the accused. Apprehending that the tiger would stay near the farm and attack, the farmer sprayed deadly insecticide on it. The tiger consumed the poisonous deer meat and died.
To destroy evidence, the farmer with the help of his accomplices dug deep and buried the carcass in a corner of the farm. The decomposed body parts, paws, and other remains have been recovered.
A team of superintendent of police, Nagpur (Rural), provided support for forensic evidence collection. The post-mortem was conducted as per the NTCA protocol and the carcass was disposed of.
This is the 23rd tiger death in Maharashtra this year. The state is second highest in the country when it comes to tiger deaths. Madhya Pradesh leads with 31 deaths.
“The incident exposes a lack of monitoring by the field staff. The kill should have been either removed or monitored,” said a former honorary wildlife warden. 
Surewani area has a history of poaching by laying live wires to kill herbivores. On January 14, 2017, a tigress and two sambars were electrocuted on Surewani road for bush meat. 
In April 2007, notorious poacher Ganda Tularam Uikey, who was known as the mini-Veerappan of the area and had killed hundreds of wild animals, died after getting electrocuted in his own trap.