Guwahati: A carcass of a female rhino was recovered from the Kaziranga National Park and Tiger Reserve on Tuesday, officials said. However, the authorities ruled out any poaching attempt on the rhino.
Divisional forest officer of the Eastern Assam wildlife division, Arun Vignesh said, the rhino died due to old age. 
He said the horn of the rhino was intact, indicating that it was not a poaching incident.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
A group of forest rangers on patrolling duty located the carcass on the banks of the Diphlu River close to the Salmara forest region.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo“It is possible that the rhino may have died somewhere and that the body travelled through the stream before washing ashore at Salmara. This is because the carcass was found at the riverbank,” he added.
On July 31, a carcass of a juvenile female rhino, suspected to have died in infighting with an adult bull rhino that probably took place out of a forced mating attempt, was recovered inside a dense forest area along the border of Baksa and Chirang district under the Kahitama beat of the Manas National Park, which is about 135 km from Guwahati.
The field director of the park Vaibhav C Mathur said the juvenile rhino, the horn of which was yet to be developed, was spotted fighting with the adult bull rhino by the forest staff on July 23. “The forest personnel spotted the juvenile female rhino continuously till July 23 as part of the daily rhino monitoring exercise. However, she could not be traced even after an active search by the forest staff since July 23,” he added.
Therefore, he said there is a possibility that there could have been a forced mating event between the adult bull rhino and the juvenile which resulted in the infighting in which the juvenile sustained severe injuries.