RANCHI: CM Champai Soren, who along with Kalpana Soren, the newly elected JMM MLA from Gandey assembly seat, attended the meeting of INDIA bloc parties in New Delhi on Wednesday evening, claimed that the coalition was able to connect with the people on real issues such as unemployment and inflation. 
"The way BJP fought this election with Modi's face at the forefront, the people rejected it by keeping it away from the majority mark.The mandate is against them. This is their moral defeat," he wrote on X after the meeting. 
The CM also said the meeting focussed on future strategy and possible allies and thanked the electorate in supporting the INDIA bloc's mission to save the democracy and constitutional rights. Before the meeting, Champai hinted that JMM was open to welcoming his Bihar counterpart and JD(U) chief Nitish Kumar back into the INDIA fold. 
"We have kept meeting in different turns of our political journey in the past. Koi dikkat nahi hai (there is no problem)," he added. Back in Ranchi, JMM insiders said the party was not eyeing any ministerial berth in the cabinet if the INDIA bloc eventually formed the govt. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndo'Not sure if we'll get cabinet berth'
 A JMM leader said, "We have just three seats in the Lower House and there are parties who won higher seats than us. I don't think we will get a cabinet berth."
JMM leaders said Wednesday's INDIA bloc meet also discussed strategies to keep the opposition united and thwart poaching bid by BJP. 
Supriyo Bhattacharya, JMM general secretary-cum-spokesperson, said the party would now concentrate all its efforts to prepare for the state assembly elections scheduled later this year. 
"The people of India and Jharkhand rejected PM Narendra Modi. Our party did well in the elections and we won three seats. Now, our focus is on winning the state assembly elections," he said. 
JMM had emerged as the largest party in the state assembly five years ago after it won 30 out of the 81 seats and eventually formed a government with Congress and RJD.