New Delhi: Officers from Delhi Police's Crime Branch arrived at the residence of chief minister Arvind Kejriwal once again on Saturday morning to serve him a notice in connection with the allegations of horse trading he made last week. Serving the notice, the cops asked the CM to answer the queries posed within three days.
Police, led by ACP Pankaj Arora, camped at the CM’s residence till the afternoon.There were heated arguments between Arora and Dialogue and Development Commission chairman Jasmine Shah, with the latter repeatedly asking the cops why the notice couldn't be served to someone else at the CM’s office and under what section of the law they wanted to serve it only to the CM.
"As a practice, police generally hand over a notice to a person to whom it is addressed. Many times, the recipients claim that they never received the office notice and thus couldn't join the investigation," an officer explained.
Sources said that the cops were taking the matter seriously because the allegations levelled by the CM indicate a possible 'mega crime' with cumulative bribe offers of around Rs 175 crore. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo“As the claims were made in public, police are duty bound to probe the allegations," claimed a senior officer.
The Crime Branch is learnt to have initiated an enquiry following a BJP delegation meeting police commissioner Sanjay Arora and submitting a complaint.
The cops had also gone to minister Atishi's house on Friday to serve her a notice, but she too wasn't available to accept it.
Kejriwal had claimed that BJP was trying to topple his government and had offered Rs 25 crore each to seven legislators to leave Aam Aadmi Party. 
He also alleged that BJP claimed to be in touch with 21 MLAs, but his party had knowledge of seven who were approached with the offer of money and ticket to contest the next election. “But all of them refused,” Kejriwal wrote on X on Jan 27.
The cops said they wanted to know the names of the MLAs approached with bribe offers and had sought the purported phone recordings of the offer, which AAP claimed it had.
Atishi had accused BJP of launching of Operation Lotus 2.0 in Delhi to win over MLAs. She claimed that a recording of a caller who had contacted an AAP MLA was available and would be brought into public domain at the appropriate time.