JODHPUR: The Rajasthan high court on Monday granted permission for the transfer of two petitions pertaining to poaching cases against Salman Khan, from the district and sessions court to itself.
Hearings on these two petitions will now take place in the high court, along with the one already pending before it.
Khan had moved a transfer petition in the high court with a pray er to transfer these two petitions to the high court so that the hearing of all the three cases can take place in one court.
“After a brief hearing, Justice PS Bhati granted permission to transfer the two petitions to the high court, where one petition by the state is already pen ding. Hearing of all these cases will now take at one place, which will save valuable time,” Khan’s counsel HM Saraswat said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreIt may be noted that Khan had challenged his 5-years-jail conviction in a case pertaining to poaching of two Blackbucks in the district and sessions court on April 5, 2018. Another petition by the state challenging Khan’s acquittal in a case under Arms’ Act is already pending in the same court.
Apart from this, the state also challenged the acquittal of five others, including Saif Ali Khan, Neelam, Sonali Bendre, and Tabbu -all film actors -apart from a local. This petition is pending in the high court.
“While the hearing pertained to same matter, we had pray ed for transferring two petitions in the district and sessions court to the high court so that the hearing of all the matters may happen at one place,” Saraswat said. 
During earlier occasions, the state’s counsel had sought time to file his reply but during the final arguments on the petition, he did not object to the two petitions being transferred to the high court. After this, the court reserved its order, which was finally pronounced on Monday, paving the way for the resumption of hearing stuck since long.