HYDERABAD: Asserting that BJP does not need to broker deals to get MLAs of other parties into its fold, Union minister G Kishan Reddy on Friday wondered whether the TRS government was so weak that chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao believed his government would fall because of four MLAs and swamijis. 
Taking a dig at TRS working president KT Rama Rao, Kishan Reddy said BJP would never be interested in taking KTR into the party even if he wanted to join.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo"Who are these swamijis who acted like brokers. None of them is a member of the BJP. The video released by the CM has nothing new to offer apart from what has already been found in the audio leak. Why does the CM think that his government is vulnerable," he asked at a press conference in Delhi.
He made it clear that BJP will wait and win the next elections. "But, KCR should first clarify on these 'gems of Telangana' (three of four MLAs involved in the cash for MLAs case) and which party they had come from. The CM should stop preaching us because he was the one who poached more than 30 legislators from various political parties in these eight years," he said.
He said it was wrong to say that BJP helped in overthrowing the Shiv Sena government in Maharashtra. "We were in alliance with the Shiv Sena, but they dropped out and formed an alliance with NCP. Their MLAs did not join us," he claimed.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoAlleging that phones of officials and TRS MLAs were being tapped, Kishan Reddy demanded an investigation into it. "There is a procedure for tapping leaders' phones and I don't think it is followed here."
Kishan Reddy ridiculed the CM's remarks at Thursday's press conference in Hyderabad. "The CM spelled the words 'it was painful' 40 times, 'atrocious of BJP' 20 times and 'I am sorry' for a dozen times. KCR should first know that his tenure as CM of Telangana has been repugnant for people of the state," he said.
Referring to the CM's statement that there will be movements akin to the one led by Jayaprakash Narayan in the past, he said: "KCR has no moral right to speak about such leaders. First, he should tell where he was when emergency was declared in the country. He should also tell which party he belongs to. He was a Congressman first, then a TDP member and now a TRS member," Kishan Reddy added.