BHOPAL: Madhya Pradesh accounts for the maximum number of blackbuck killings as per official figures, followed by Karnataka and Uttar Pradesh while the forest department is struggling with sluggish trials of over 170 blackbuck poaching cases in the last 39 years.
Endowed with rich wildlife in its jungles, stretching across four districts, Bhopal, Raisen, Sehore, Guna circle had healthy populations of all varieties of deer.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoIn spite of tough anti hunting laws, there is no dearth of shooters whose meat fetish goes beyond chicken and lamb and who still think of hunting as sport.
Sadly, very few of them are convicted, said sources in the forest department. Forest officials, police and informers who have come across these hunters say the risk of jail doesn't deter them. Officials say, policemen shot dead by game hunters in Guna district on Friday night is only a tip of the iceberg as forest areas close to the state capital have become a favorite hunting ground of blackbucks. They had killed five blackbucks and a peacock before they fired upon the police team which tried to arrest them.
Wildlife Control Bureau (WCCB) officials say around 139 endangered blackbucks were killed in 13 states of the country between 2008 and 2018 and Madhya Pradesh accounted for the maximum number of blackbuck killings at 31, followed by 25 in Karnataka and 24 in Uttar Pradesh. The number has only increased in the last four years, officers informed.
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoAround 38 poachers were arrested in MP in that period, followed by 23 in Karnataka, nine in Rajasthan, eight in Uttar Pradesh, six each in Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra, five in Haryana, four in Delhi and nine in four other states.
Of 170 blackbuck poaching cases pending for trials since 1972, Bhopal circle has the lion’s share of 46 cases — 15 of them between 2013 and 2015. Convictions are, however, few and far between — not even 5%, as per official figures. In one of the cases a court in Chhindwara district had sentenced blackbuck poachers to three years jail a few months back, officers informed.
Bhopal has registered a few cases of blackbuck poaching in the last two years. Other cases were reported from Seoni, Betul, Hoshangabad, Sehore, Raisen and Vidisha districts,” said an officer of the state’s wildlife cell. Once found in abundance, black buck has registered a steady decline in population due to unbridled poaching. According to law, only officers not below the rank of assistant director of wildlife preservation or assistant conservator of forests have the power to investigate. In November 2016, five special courts were designated to hear cases of wildlife protection. It led to encouraging results.
Blackbucks are protected animals under the Schedule 1 of the Wildlife Act, 1972. They are in the PETA list of extremely vulnerable species. In 1947, there were around 80,000 blackbucks in the country. Presently, their population has dwindled to a large extent. 
They are known for their soft coats and twisted horns. Experts say they are nervous by nature and often die of cardiac arrest even in the face of a perceived danger.