THANE: MNS chief Raj Thackeray accused UBT chief Uddhav Thackeray and NCP (SP) chief Sharad Pawar of having started poaching leaders much before rebellions split their respective parties in the last two years.
Thackeray was in Kalwa, Sunday, campaigning for Mahayuti candidates for Thane and Kalyan Lok Sabha seats- Naresh Mhaske and Dr Shrikant Shinde.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoIncidentally, he was addressing Sainiks for the first time in the metropolitan region after his exit from the Sena in 2005.
Thackeray pointed how the Uddhav-led Sena had previously poached into his corporators after the BMC polls and also accused Pawar of triggering split in the Congress earlier.
Commenting on the 2024 Lok Sabha elections, he expressed concern that the political parties had no proper agenda unlike the previous elections and probably that’s why they were targeting each other’s families.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoHe further accused his cousin of moving away from Balasaheb’s ideologies for the sake of power. He also sought to know how come a woman (Sushama Andhare) who had made some uncharitable statements about Balasaheb was elevated in the UBT and also questioned how come Uddhav shared power with Chaggan Bhujbal who had attempted to jail Balasaheb.
"People voted them (Sena-BJP) to power but after the results, Uddhav suddenly changed his stance seeing an opportunity. He later claimed there was a closed door discussion but why did he remain silent for so long and strated bargaining after the results… Suppose, if the BJP had agreed to his demand, would he (Uddhav) have behaved in the same manner. It is as if the votes and the efforts of voters were wasted," Raj said.
Thackeray raked up the dormant migrant influx issue and expressed concern how Thane district was rapidly witnessing a population explosion. “Thane probably is the only district in the world to witness such a growth and it has so many municipal bodies operating. The native taxpayers are facing burden due to influx of migrants here. No amount of infrastructure will be adequate unless a solution is worked out...," he urged Dr Shinde and Mhaske.
He also touched the issue of how several accused of anti-social activities - most of who - were found to have been staying prominently in the suburb of Mumbra.
The MNS chief who earlier visited the office cum residence of late Shiv Sena leader Anand Dighe at Tembhi naka didn’t forget to remind the assembled Sainiks and Mahayuti activists about his special bonding with Dighe and his Thane tours.