PATNA: With a view to protecting migratory birds from poachers, the department of environment, forest and climate change (DEFCC) has asked the authorities concerned to intensify patrolling near water bodies like Kabar Lake in Begusarai, Sarotar Lake in East Champaran and Rajdhani Jalashay in Patna.
The principal secretary of the DEFCC, Dipak Kumar Singh, told this newspaper on Saturday that all the district magistrates, superintendents of police and divisional forest officers (DFO) had been instructed to keep tabs on activities like illegal killing and trade of migratory birds during the winter season. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
“Water bodies like Kabar Lake in Begusarai, Sarotar Lake in East Champaran and Rajdhani Jalashay in Patna witness the arrival of migratory birds from different parts of Central Asia. Hence, it is our responsibility to protect them from bird hunters,” Dipak said, adding that poachers in the state would be booked under various sections of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972.
A poacher was arrested from Sarotar Lake in East Champaran with 155 skinned migratory birds on January 24. The lake is often referred to as a “paradise” of migratory birds.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoTalking about the Durgavati reservoir in Kaimur district, DFO Vikash Ahlawat said, “We have intensified patrolling and deployed a team near the reservoir to keep an eye on bird hunters. We have also created a separate unit which is stationed at the observation centre of the reservoir.”
According to ornithologists, different species of migratory birds such as Eurasian coot, common teal, Asian openbill, tufted duck, wagtail, northern pintail, gadwall, wood-warbler, European pied flycatcher and woolly-necked stork visit the state every year.
Naveen Kumar, a member of the Bombay Natural History Society (pan-India wildlife research organization), claimed that quite a few poaching cases were registered at Kusheshwar Asthan in Darbhanga. “A portion of the bird sanctuary lies in Saharsa’s Jalai Chaur where there is no road connectivity. Poachers consider it a peaceful hunting ground with no interruption from the authorities concerned. They capture, kill and sell the migratory birds across the state at exorbitant rates,” he added.
Asked about the ways to stop poaching, Naveen replied, “We need to raise awareness about the importance of migratory birds, create alternative sources of income for the poachers and take strict action against the culprits.”
Various species of ducks (22), raptors (15), waders (8) and small birds (10) visit Bihar during the winter season from 30 different countries of Central Asia. Rajdhani Jalashay in Patna alone witnesses the arrival of several migratory birds like Eurasian coot, gadwall, garganey and greenish warbler.