HYDERABAD: Telangana chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao on Thursday claimed that those detained in connection with the "TRS MLAs poaching case" had plans to overthrow four state governments, including his own and Rajasthan, which was governed by the Congress. He also made an appeal to the judiciary to protect democracy.
At a press conference held here, Rao mentioned the current "TRS MLAs poaching issue" and played a video that purportedly detailed the incident that resulted in the arrest of three people. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
"They openly say in the video we already dethroned eight (state) governments. And how they conducted the operation. Now we (the men) are in the process of dethroning four governments, i.e Telangana, Delhi, Andhra Pradesh and Rajasthan," he said.
The three men arrested in the case took the names of top leaders, Rao said. Condemning the claims of the three persons in strong words, he said the men spoke about dethroning non-BJP governments. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe Arvind Kejriwal-led AAP heads the Delhi government while YSRCP is in the ruling saddle in neighbouring Andhra Pradesh.
Rao said such video evidence has already been submitted to the High Court in connection with the MLAs poaching case. He further said he will send all the evidence he got in the "TRS MLAs poaching case" to the Chief Justice of India, CJs of all High Courts, media houses, CBI and ED for their knowledge. 
He also requested the CJI and judges to "protect the country and safeguard democracy." 
He said Home Minister Amit Shah himself speaking at a public meeting in Munugode in October had said within one month the TRS Government will go away. 
The Cyberabad Police on October 26 filed an FIR against three persons who allegedly tried to coax four TRS legislators into defecting, even as BJP leadership in Telangana vehemently denied having any knowledge of the alleged poaching of TRS MLAs by their party. 
Based on a complaint by Pilot Rohith Reddy, one of the legislators, cases under relevant sections criminal conspiracy, offering bribe and Prevention of Corruption Act-1988 were filed against the trio- Ramachandra Bharati@ Satish Sharma, Nanda Kumar and Simhayaji Swamy. PTI SJR GDK SA SA