CHANDRAPUR: Durgapur police in the district have on Friday registered an offence against foresters attached to Chandrapur range for alleged inhuman torture of tribals, detained on charges of poaching, from Chicholi village.
Seven tribals were allegedly beaten black and blue on soles of their foot with baton and were also given electric shocks during the torture on two consecutive days, claims a complaint by the tribals to the police.
Forest officials, however, maintain that while investigating a poaching case, a team had taken the suspects to the village for recovery of evidence, when the members were mobbed.
A tribal organization Ulgulan is up in arms against the alleged atrocities meted to the villagers and has submitted a memorandum to collector and superintendent of police seeking dismissal of those involved in the torture.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreAccording to the complainant tribals, a team of around nine foresters had picked up Aakash Chandekar, Ishwar Ramteke, Hanuman Asutkar and Sandeep Asutkar on Wednesday afternoon from Chicholi village, located on the fringe of Tadoba buffer, on the suspicion of being involved in poaching of spotted deer with the help of electrified wire in their farm. 
The foursome were taken to range office and then to Rambagh nursery. They were brutally thrashed with plastic baton and were given electric shocks with the help of battery at both the places, claims the complaint. 
The complaint also alleged that during interrogation, suspect Chandekar was made to strip and the foresters even threatened him to give shock to his private parts with a live wire.
The accused were allowed to return home in the same evening, only to be summoned next day (Thursday morning) and again subjected to similar inhuman torture, reads the complaint, adding three more suspects — Sandeep Nehare, Mangesh Asutkar and Rakesh Sao — were also brought to Rambagh and were beaten and given electric shocks.
The tribals have named forest guards Gulab Yadav and Vijay Bhimanwar and their colleagues as the culprits. 
Tables turned against the foresters after they released Ishwar Ramteke, Hanuman Asutkar and Sandeep Asutkar on Thursday. In the evening, a forest team took the remaining accused to the village for recovery of evidence. However, by then the trio released earlier had reached the village and narrated the torture to the villagers. As the forest team entered the village, a mob gheraoed it and started questioning the members about the torture. 
There are also reports of manhandling of foresters by the irked villagers.
After the foresters trapped in the village called for help, RFO Chandrapur, Rahul Karekare, informed Durgapur police and rushed to the place with a posse of cops. By that time, tribal leader Raju Zode too had also reached the village.
Durgapur PSO Swapnil Dhule pacified the angry mob and carried out medical examination of the tribals alleged to have been beaten up by the foresters. 
Based on the medical examination, offence under sections 323, 324 and 34 of IPC has been registered against forester Yadav and Bhimanwar, and their unidentified colleagues on Friday.
Chief conservator of forest, Chandrapur, NR Pravin, claimed the villagers turned upon foresters who had taken the suspects to the village for recovery of evidence. Angry mob manhandled a couple of forest guards, he claimed. The mob surrounded the forest team and prevented them from discharging their duty. It was only after RFO Karekar reached there with a police team, the forest team could be rescued, he said. 
He also ratified that cops have registered offence against the foresters for torture, and maintained he is going to seek report about entire matter from RFO Chandrapur. He also ruled out forest department filing any counter-complaint against the villagers.
Meanwhile, Zode termed the torture of tribals as horrible and inhuman and through a memorandum submitted to the collector and SP demanded dismissal of those involved.