Keri: Though the Wildlife Protection Act bans the poaching and killing of turtles, some villagers in Sattari and Bicholim are seen poaching turtles for consumption of the meat of this protected reptile. 
During the monsoon, turtles are most active in the early part of the morning as well as the evening hours. They spend the day basking in the sun and come out to relish on aquatic vegetation along the edges of water bodies.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoDuring these hours villagers poach them and roast them alive on a fire for the meat.
In Sattari and Bicholim villagers poach the Indian black turtle, a species of medium-size fresh water turtle found in various parts of Goa. No comprehensive study has been conducted till date to ascertain the population and status of these species of turtles. 
While in Pernem taluka turtle meat was consumed in the past, it is no longer the case, a resident of Pernem said. But people here say that failure of officials from the forest department to raise awareness about turtle poaching is leading to the practice being followed in other areas. “People from the older generation hunted and consumed turtle meat. Youth are rarely seen poaching. So far no action has been taken by the forest department, both in terms of law enforcement as well as awareness about the ecological role of the turtles,” said Narayan Kalangutkar, a wildlifer from Ibrampur, Pernem.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoPandurang Gawasm a villager from Shiroli, Sattari said that in many parts of Sattari turtle meat is considered a monsoon delicacy and locals go to great lengths to poach turtles. “People move out in search of turtles and catch them when they are basking in the sunlight,” he said.
“The turtle species have been protected under the Wildlife Protection Act. Hunting, trade or any other form of utilisation of the turtle species for their body parts and derivatives is banned. But turtles are still poached on a large scale during the monsoon season. It is extremely worrisome to see the scale of poaching and turtle meat consumption,” wildlife rescuer Vitthal Shelke said.
Turtles play a crucial role as scavengers by keeping the aquatic ecosystem clean. Some species have been known to bring the population of snails and insects under control.
Vivek Gaonkar, range forest officer (RFO), Keri said, “Our staff has been involved in discouraging incidents of wildlife poaching. There is a need to create awareness among people to stop this type of poaching. If any such incident is brought to our notice we will take action against violators of the Wildlife Act.”