BENGALURU: While the state Congress and BJP leaderships are locked in a war of words over poaching of legislators and cadres, loyalists in both parties have voiced opposition against the practice of inducing defections. The trend has rekindled the ‘insider vs outsider’ debate, especially in Congress.
On Tuesday, a group of ‘like-minded’ senior Congress functionaries decided to air their concerns with the party brass.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe group had met on Monday to protest the party’s decision to limit nominations to posts in state-run boards and corporations only to legislators and keep party workers waiting for the next phase of appointments.
“Hordes of functionaries from BJP and JD(S) are being inducted into the Congress fold in groups,” said S Manohar, state Congress general secretary. “The problem is that outsiders will eat into opportunities of loyalists. There is no need for the party to take in cadres from other parties when we have enough people who are ready to work hard.”
Manohar said functionaries had met chief minister Siddaramaiah on Monday and urged him to appoint party workers too as heads of boards and corporations. On Tuesday, they met deputy chief minister and state Congress president DK Shivakumar and requested him to exercise restraint in terms of welcoming legislators and cadres from other parties.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoLast week, MLA from Mandya, Ravikumar Gowda (popularly called Ravi Ganiga), had stirred consternation when he claimed that a team of BJP functionaries had offered him and some of his colleagues Rs 50 crore to defect to the saffron party. He claimed the same team which was behind the fall of JD(S)-Congress coalition government had unleashed Operation Kamala, and is working to poach MLAs from the governing party. At the same time, Congress functionaries led by Shivakumar have been luring functionaries from BJP and JD(S) and have apparently devised Operation Hastha to counter Operation Kamala.
Shivakumar has several times admitted at public events organised to induct defectors into Congress that he used “baited hooks” (gaala in Kannada) to lure functionaries from opposition parties. He reiterated this recently when he welcomed former BJP MLA Poornima Srinivas and her husband DT Srinivas, who has been named a Congress candidate for MLC elections in June next year.
“Ideology-based polarisation that sees voters and cad res drifting from one party to the other is welcome as it marks transition of politics,” said BL Shankar, state Congress vice-president. “But defections for individual benefit should not be encouraged. The practice is unethical. While BJP started this trend, Congress has been forced to counter it. But the leadership of both parties should vehemently discourage it.”
The Congress brass has said it is aware of BJP’s efforts to topple the government and that they have taken steps to keep their flock of MLAs together. “Our government is stable. It will not fall just because BJP leaders are predicting so and putting efforts to destabilise it,” said Siddaramaiah on Tuesday.
In BJP too, voices of dissent are well pronounced. MP Renukacharya, former MLA and senior BJP functionary, has been a fierce critic of the trend. He said the decision to trigger the fall of the JD(S)-Congress coalition through Operation Kamala had only a “short-term benefit”. “It helped us form the government, but it hit us loyalists hard as defectors grabbed all the opportunities. This was one of the reasons for our defeat in the assembly elections. Our leaders should learn from this and stop poaching MLAs from other parties.”