PANAJI/CANACONA: Aware that BJP will not win a clear majority, chief minister Pramod Sawant and BJP MLAs Vishwajit Rane and Mauvin Godinho are offering crores to certain Congress candidates in a bid to “poach” them after the results, said state Congress president Girish Chodankar.
In a veiled threat, he said that BJP MLAs will face the wrath of the people and Congress workers if they make fresh overtures to successful Congress candidates. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Chodankar said that Sawant, Rane and Godinho claim to be in the race for the chief minister’s post and are trying to woo probable legislators. “Vishwajit Rane, Pramod Sawant and Mauvin Godinho have started efforts to poach our candidates after elections by offering crores of rupees. We want to give them and their brokers who are roaming a public warning,” said Chodankar.
He said that Congress has taken precautions to prevent defections and is confident that none of party’s future legislators will leave to join BJP. The Congress president said that the party workers will not “sit quiet” and “if anything happens” Congress should not be held responsible.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteChodankar and Canacona candidate Janardhan Bhandari also accused the chief minister of trying to harass government workers and intimidate police personnel who are set to submit their postal ballots. Sawant, said Chodankar, has started issuing transfer orders to those officers who may have not voted for BJP.
“The police department sent a wireless message asking how many police personnel have voted, how many applied for ballot papers and how many have not cast their vote. Names, constituency and phone numbers were also sought and all this information was given to the chief minister. This is a strategy to put pressure on them to vote for BJP,” said Chodankar.