HYDERABAD: The Telangana police on Wednesday claimed that they had caught three persons associated with BJP while they were trying to bribe four key TRS MLAs into defecting to the saffron party. TRS sources claimed that the four MLAs were offered Rs 100 crore each apart from contracts running into crores to cross over. BJP, however, has said it has nothing to do with the alleged poaching.
The allegations have been made even as campaigning to the Munugode byelection in Nalgonda has peaked.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoTRS sources claimed that BJP was trying to engineer the defections so that the four MLAs join them on October 31, when the party’s national chief, JP Nadda, arrives in Telangana to campaign in Munugode.
The four TRS MLAs who were allegedly targeted include Guvvala Balaraj from Achampet, Rohith Reddy from Tandur, Kollapur MLA Harshavardhan Reddy and Pinapaka MLA Rega Kantha Rao. Although police officials did not show any cash seizure, sources said that had found a car at the spot with a large amount of cash in it.
Cyberabad police commissioner Stephen Raveendra told reporters that the TRS MLAs had themselves ale rted the cops about the alleged attempt to bribe them after which they conducted a raid at the farmhouse of Rohith Reddy and found the four MLAs and the alleged BJP aides in discussion. There was, however, no clarity on which sections of the law were invoked against the accused.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndo“The MLAs were offered cash, contracts and posts,” Raveendra claimed. “After the MLAs gave us the information,a raid was co nducted by the police and we found three persons there. They are Rama Chandra Bharathi alias Satish Sharma who is associated with a temple in Faridabad and lives in Delhi,Nanda Kumar from Hyderabad and D Simhayaji from Tirupati. ”
All the four MLAs left the farmhouse after the raid and r ushed to Pragati Bhavan, CM K Chandrasekhar Rao’sresidence and camp office. TRS Chennur MLA Balka Suman s aid, “In Telangana, BJP’s inability to win the people’s goodwill has led to it trying to lure TRS MLAs. Since TRS is going to win Munugode with a big margin, BJP is trying different conspiracies which includes trying to buy our MLAs. ”
Reacting sharply to the allegations, former BJP MLC Ramchander Rao said, “BJP has nothing to do with the alleged poaching of MLAs by a few individuals at a f armhouse from where Rs 15 crore is supposed to have been seized from a car. It is disgusting that TRS has orchestrated such political drama. ”