PILIBHIT: Pangolin, also known as an ecosystem engineer for playing a role in the land's health, which has been enlisted in Schedule-I of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, is confronting the perils of massive poaching and illegal trafficking in India. 
According to the latest analysis of pangolin seizures in India done jointly by TRAFFIC, a United Kingdom-based wildlife trade monitoring network, and the World Wide Fund For Nature - India, as many as 342 seizures revealed that 1,203 pangolins were poached and trafficked for illicit trade in the last five years between 2018 and 2022 across the country.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Despite being a mammal of Schedule-I, the pangolins allegedly lack any substantial action plan in terms of their protection and conservation. Ironically, the country has no official estimation of the pangolin population till now.
Expressing concern over the habitat loss and increasing threats to the survival of pangolins on the eve of World Pangolin Day, Dr Merwyn Fernandes, the coordinator of TRAFFIC India's office, said, "India has reported a significant number of pangolin trafficking incidents across the country. Pangolins are poached mainly for international markets in China and Southeast Asia for their scales which are used as an ingredient in traditional medicines that are believed to cure many ailments." He further said, "The pangolin meat is deemed to be a delicacy and is also consumed for its alleged medicinal properties. The American markets demand pangolin skins for making leather products such as boots and belts."
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MorePoaching and illegal trafficking of pangolins in India have been so rampant that their seizure incidents are reported across twenty-five states and union territories. From 2018-2022, Odisha reported the highest number of 74 seizures involving 154 pangolins in the illegal wildlife trade. It was followed by Maharashtra with the trafficking of 135 pangolins in 47 cases, Fernandez said.
Meanwhile,, the principal chief conservator of forest (wildlife) of Uttar Pradesh, Kamlesh Kumar, said that he would soon launch a massive awareness program on pangolin species across the state with plans to sensitise the personnel of forest and wildlife, railway police, civil police, judiciary and the paramilitary forces for curbing their illegal trade.