PANAJI: Senior MGP leader and Marcaim MLA elect Ramkrishna ‘Sudin’ Dhavalikar on Friday said that his party has supported BJP to form the new government after senior central BJP leaders assured him that they will not poach any MLAs from other parties. 
He, however, refused to comment on the continuation of his party’s alliance with TMC. 
MGP, which won two seats, Marcaim (Dhavalikar) and Mandrem (Jit Arolkar), had extended its unconditional support to BJP on Thursday, within minutes of counting concluding.Days ahead of counting, the two parties had held talks to finalise a post-poll alliance with BJP. 
“I have taken an assurance from senior BJP leaders from Delhi that they will not poach MLAs,” Dhavalikar said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoDuring the last assembly tenure, two MGP MLAs had merged the party’s legislature wing into BJP. 
Dhavalikar urged BJP’s Pernem MLA elect Pravin Arlekar and Mayem MLA elect Premendra Shet, who had moved from MGP to BJP prior to the polls, not to switch political allegiance again. 
Stating that MGP does not support defection, he said that national parties are also of the same mindset. He said that Congress did not give a ticket to any defector. 
“I hope that BJP will not take in defected MLAs. If all parties sideline those MLAs who jump from one party to another, then we can provide a good government,” Dhavalikar said.
Reacting to BJP’s claim of increased vote share in this assembly election, he said that this has been seen in only two constituencies — Poriem and Valpoi. “And I don’t have to mention the reason behind this increase,” Dhavalikar said.
Asked if MGP will contest the panchayat election, he said that panchayat elections are not held on party lines. 
On AAP and TMC, Dhavalikar said that “parties from outside” have opened their accounts in the state and that local political parties would be sidelined in the near future. “They have money, karyakartas and management and it is a signal to Congress and BJP as their vote share has decreased.” 
Dhavalikar said that TMC has got 10% vote share. The alliance with TMC did not have any effect on MGP’s performance at the polls, he said.