New Delhi: Senior AAP leader and Rajya Sabha member Sanjay Singh on Saturday alleged that BJP was trying to poach newly elected councillors and was offering Rs 10 crore each to anyone willing to jump ship.
Addressing a press conference at the AAP headquarters, Singh alleged that BJP had a budget of Rs 100 crore to “buy 10 AAP councillors” and claimed that Delhi BJP president Adesh Gupta was behind the calls made to his party’s councillors.Singh was accompanied by three municipal councillors who claimed to have received calls from BJP leaders.
BJP, however, claimed that it was Aam Aadmi Party, which was trying to poach other party’s MLAs.
Singh alleged that a saffron party leader named Yogendra Chandolia called the father of AAP’s Patel Nagar councillor Runakshi Sharma and made him talk to Gupta. The councillor’s father claimed that Gupta offered Rs 10 crore each for 10 municipal councillors for switching sides.
While Gupta could not be contacted, Chandolia in a tweet challenged AAP to register a police case against him if he had made such calls.
Vishwas Nagar councillor Jyoti Rani’s husband claimed a man offered him Rs 50 lakh on behalf of BJP for cross-voting in MCD elections. Pushp Vihar councillor Arun Navariya alleged that the outgoing municipal councillor from his ward was threatening to have him killed.
Singh alleged that despite getting 30 seats less than AAP, BJP was trying to have its mayor in MCD and offering money and threatening his party’s councillors to have them on their side and urged the police commissioner to arrest those behind it. He also asked the election commission to intervene in the case.
Leader of Opposition in Delhi Assembly Ramvir Singh Bidhuri alleged that it was AAP which was engaged in poaching other party’s councillors. Bidhuri also alleged that the AAP leaders were threatening councillors of other political parties that they would have to switch sides if they wanted to get development work done in their areas.
Delhi BJP spokesperson Praveen Shankar Kapoor called Singh’s allegations as an “eyewash”. “They are trying to divert attention from early morning exposure by our councillor Monica Pant of how an AAP leader tried to politically bribe her for cross-voting in MCD House,” Kapoor said.