NAGPUR: Gadchiroli forest officials on Friday cracked the poaching of a tigress in Mosam in Aheri forest range and arrested four persons from the village who electrocuted the animal. A team has been sent to neighbouring Telangana to nab more persons.
“The officials recovered four canines, eight claws and whiskers from the accused who have confessed to the crime.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoA few of the other accused have absconded to Telangana with the skull. A team sent to Kagajnagar will work with the counterparts there to search the accused,” said PCCF (wildlife) Sunil Limaye.
On Thursday, the carcass of the tigress was found buried in a nullah. Looking into the gravity of the case and three tiger deaths in the last five days, PCCF Limaye rushed to the spot to supervise the entire operation.
Though the incident was brought to light by a section of villagers who noticed a stray dog chewing a tiger bone, Limaye claimed the forest staff during patrolling smelled a rat when they saw a swarm of flies on the dry branches of a tree. They searched the area and found that the tigress carcass was buried in a nullah in compartment number 615.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA Institute“The staff got suspicious and shared information with the assistant conservator (ACF) concerned who along with other officials, police and veterinary officers reached the spot and exhumed the carcass. It was an adult tigress with head and all four paws chopped,” said Limaye.
Limaye said the tiger might have died 4-6 days ago. It was also observed that around 300 metre from the spot where the carcass was buried a 1km long live wire had been laid from the 11 KV overhead electric line. Dragging marks were also observed near the spot.
Kishore Mankar, conservator of forest (CF), Gadchiroli, said, “The accused seem to be habitual poachers. Two years ago a man from the same Mosam village had died after coming in contact with live electric wires laid by him for poaching herbivores. From preliminary observations, it is a case of electrocution and poachers buried the carcass in the sand to destroy evidence.”
Limaye said 32 tiger deaths were reported in 2021. Of them, 18 tigers died due to natural reasons while one was a railway accident, 3 tigers were electrocuted, and 6 poached. Cases of four tiger deaths are under investigation.
Even if what Limaye says is true, the fact remains that the wildlife wing has not updated its data by adding the number of tiger deaths considering the seizure of tiger body parts this year.
“Since July, the Nagpur forest division officials have seized a huge consignment of tiger bones, claws, whiskers, skin and other body parts in separate raids in the region. Over 80 poachers are still behind bars. The seizure of these body parts can be accounted for at least 10 tigers,” said officials.