Nagpur/Guwahati: With several tiger reserves in the country on the radar of organized gangs of Bawaria poachers from Haryana, the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB), a statutory body under the ministry of environment, forest and climate change (MoEFCC), has issued a red alert.
WCCB sources said the immediate trigger to sound an alert was the seizure of a nine-foot-long tiger skin and around 18kg bones from four accused in Guwahati, Assam, on June 28.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe skin is suspected to be from the Chandrapur landscape.
The tiger reserves and their adjoining forest areas on the radar include Tadoba (Maharashtra), Satpura (MP), Corbett and Rajaji (Uttarakhand), Pench (MP & Maharashtra), Amangarh and Pilibhit (UP), and Valmiki (Bihar). Tiger-bearing forest pockets in Gadchiroli, Chandrapur, and Balaghat have also been put on alert.
The alert issued by HV Girisha, additional director of WCCB, has asked all the field directors of tiger reserves and territorial areas adjoining them to intensify patrolling based on credible inputs about organized gangs becoming active, and revelations from tiger body parts seizures.
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe accused included two women. The accused have been identified as Ramu Das (40) from Samalkha in Panipat, and Om Prakash (45), Maya Devi, and Rajwati, all from Pinjore in Haryana. The tiger skin was to be smuggled to Myanmar through a trader from Shillong in Meghalaya.
Acting on intelligence from a wildlife NGO, Guwahati police nabbed the culprits from a rented house in Dharapur (Majali) on Wednesday night. The skin is feared to be from Chandrapur district, though confirmation and verification is being done by the WCCB.
Maharashtra PCCF (wildlife) Maheep Gupta denied that the skin and body parts were from Chandrapur. “I have spoken to WCCB officials, and they said the material is from UP,” said Gupta.
However, Keshav Kumar, ex-IPS officer and consultant to the Assam home department, who guided the police in seizure, has said that the tiger was killed about a month back possibly in a Maharashtra forest.
“We have verified the skin with the database of Tadoba but it doesn’t match. We are in touch with WII, which has database of the entire landscape. Being a weekend, the verification work will be done on Monday. It is for sure that the skin is not from UP. We are also matching the stripes with tigers from Satpura reserve in MP,” said WCCB officials on condition of anonymity.
Even if Gupta is in denial mode, the call detail records (CDRs) with police reveal a Maharashtra connection to poaching. The tiger is feared to have been hunted from somewhere in Bramhapuri division in Chandrapur, said sources.
Guwahati (west) deputy commissioner of police Padmanabh Baruah told TOI, “We don’t have much to say as the case has now been handed over to DFO, Kamrup East Division. There is a probability of Maharashtra connection considering the CDRs of the accused.”
Sources said the cell numbers of the accused were located in Gadchiroli and Chandrapur, and later Bihar in mid-June. The poachers must have killed the tiger somewhere in June and started for Assam between June 16-18. The last location of poachers was in Bihar, when they must be travelling to deliver the skin to Guwahati.
DCP Baruah said, “The accused said they received the consignment at a station in Bihar and reached Guwahati to deliver it to another party.”
Kamrup DFO RB Saikia said, “The accused are telling a cock-and-bull story. They said they were not involved in poaching and received the consignment in Bihar to deliver to a person in Guwahati.”
The accused were produced before a court in Kamrup (Metro) district seeking remand for a few days. “With the progress of interrogation, the racket and their network will come to light,” Saikia said.
Bramhapuri and Gadchiroli landscape has a history of organized tiger poaching. In 2012-2013, poachers removed at least 30 tigers, as confessed by poachers themselves. Earlier, it was the Baheliyas and now the Bawarias have taken over. Most of the tigers are targeted in monsoon when patrolling is dull.