DEHRADUN: In a major success, the Uttarakhand Special Task Force in joint association with the Central Forest Division team Rudrapur caught four animal smugglers, including Haridwari Ram, the son of the notorious tiger poacher Totharam Bawariya, from the Laksar area of Haridwar district on Thursday. 
The hide of two tigers and two motorcycles were seized from the possession of the arrested persons.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Under “Schedule I” of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, tigers are classified as endangered.
Sharing the information SSP STF Ajay Singh told TOI, “On basis of specific inputs, a team headed by CO STF Poornima Garg was formed. The team in a joint venture with the Central Forest Division Rudrapur team, followed the poachers from Bazpur in Udham Singh Nagar district and arrested them in the Laksar area of Haridwar district on Thursday.”
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreThe four arrested have been identified as Bunty (45) from Haridwar, Ramdhari (60), a resident of Jalandhar Punjab, Shyam Lal (35) from Hoshiarpur in Punjab and Haridwari Ram (30) a resident of Nawanshahr in Punjab.
The police officer maintained the matter was being followed for a period of over a month.
“We are questioning the arrested on how they got the tiger skin and who were they going to supply it to. The gang has been active and in the past has supplied animal parts in different parts of Uttar Pradesh and Delhi,” said Singh, adding, “During the questioning we have collected some important information and we are proceeding further in the matter.”
He did not fail to mention that the STF has taken action in six matters related to wildlife in 2022 in matters related to wildlife and six animal smugglers have been arrested.
Singh added that in 2021, STF had arrested Totha Ram Bawariya. In the past, Totha Ram had been arrested on several occasions in matters like poaching of tigers and other animals. In the past, he had been arrested in 2009, May 2003 and August 2002. Totha Ram hails from a family of tiger poachers and his sister Dilpo was earlier sentenced to jail term in a tiger poaching case.