Hyderabad: In the confession report by Telangana former deputy commissioner of police (Task Force) Radha Kishan Rao, who is an accused in the illegal phone tapping case, it was mentioned that former chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao (who he referred as 'peddayana' or 'elder') reportedly wanted to use the Moinabad farmhouse MLAs poaching case as a bait to make BJP arrive at a compromise.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoUsing the case, KCR wanted to bail his daughter and MLC K Kavitha out of the Delhi liquor scam case.

FAILED ATTEMPT
Radha Kishan narrated these developments leading to the 2022 MLAs poaching case, which finally led to a failed attempt by Telangana police to arrest BJP senior functionary BL Santhosh.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndo"Peddayana was angry for not completing the 'work' as per his expectation. I will not disclose further details as I owe a lot to Peddayana who had re-appointed me two times and posted me in the city Task Force after my retirement in 2020," Radha Kishan said in his confession. 
The officials, who were part of the special investigation team (SIT) probing the MLAs poaching case, also used a chartered flight, he said in his alleged confession.
KCR BID TO CORNER BJP
"In Oct last year, Prabhakar (then Special Intelligence Bureau chief T Prabhakar Rao) discussed with me that KCR got information from (then) Tandur MLA Pilot Rohith Reddy that some persons claiming to be influential in BJP are in touch with him and asked him to join the BJP by leaving BRS along with some other MLAs. KCR, in a bid to corner BJP, asked the SIB to do surveillance on private persons and the MLA. SIB (former) deputy SP D Praneeth Rao did surveillance and provided audio clip by intercepting the phones," Radha Kishan said in confession.
TOLD COPS TO LAY TRAP
The clip was then shared with KCR, who ordered police to lay a trap and told Rohith to cooperate with the police. "Accordingly, the MLA enticed Nandu (hotel owner Nanda Kumar) and two lesser known swamijis (Ramachandra Bharati and Simhayaji) to come to the farmhouse in Moinabad," the former DCP reportedly said. For this operation, spy cameras were reportedly bought by Task Force sleuths from Delhi. KCR allegedly asked three more MLAs from different communities to be part of the operation. He instructed Cyberabad police to cooperate with senior officials of the Task Force and SIB, the confession report said.
 FLIGHT FOR SIT TEAM
"Later, SIT was formed and KCR wanted to arrest BJP national leader Santhosh to make the case strong so that BJP would come for a compromise and it can be used to get rid of the ED case against his daughter Kavitha. However, due to the inefficiency of some officials in Cyberabad police, an important person of Mata Amritanandamayi Institution escaped from police apprehension," the alleged confession report said. As a follow-up, SP rank officer Rema Rajeshwari led a team of policemen and took the chartered flight to Kerala but they failed to nab the wanted person, Radha Kishan mentioned.