Kolkata: Violence, poaching, intrigue, switching of sides and even ghar wapsi. All this and more marked Thursday during formation of panchayat boards following the recently held rural polls. The action was mostly concentrated at Mandirbazar in South 24 Parganas, Jangipara in Hooghly, Khejuri in East Midnapore, Jalangi in Murshidabad and Malda’s Gazole.
BJP supporters led by Agnimitra Paul staged a blockade on Kulpi Road after the BDO, in consultation with the police, served a notice on Krishnapur gram panchayat members at Mandirbazar stating that board formation had been stalled for the day.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo“The Trinamool is biding time to buy out some more members and form the board,” she said, announcing that BJP will move the high court.
The alleged ‘abduction’ of three BJP members and one CPM-supported Independent from Panchasayar along the EM Bypass a few days ago didn’t come of any help to Trinamool in Mathurapur’s Krishnachandrapur. The BJP, with six members in the 15-member panchayat, formed the board with three CPM and three CPM-supported Independents.
The scene was different at Bishnubar gram panchayat II in East Midnapore’s Tamluk, where the BJP sprung a surprise by getting more votes than its numbers.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoParties made desperate attempts to poach rival camp members too. Three TMC members from Arunda panchayat in Hooghly’s Arambag joined the BJP, sparking tension. Another three TMC members from Dahala in Bankura joined the BJP. The twist in the tale came from Manidaha panchayat III in Midnapore. Three TMC members, who had joined BJP in the morning, did a ghar wapsi after a few hours.
Tension was building up at Furfura panchayat in Hooghly’s Jangipara, where the TMC was way ahead of opposition numbers. But the panchayat office was found to be under “lock and key”. ISF Bhangar MLA and Pirzada of Furfura Sharif Nawsad Siddique came in the way of police when they reached the spot to unlock the office. “I want to know who pelted stones on my house,” the MLA asked. Additional SP Laltu Haldar told Siddique that his men had thrown stones instead. The spat soon snowballed into a clash.
Bullets flew in Nichaksaba panchayat under Khejuri II in East Midnapore as attention was on the board in Nandigram. A few policemen and husband of the newly elected pradhan sustained bullet injuries. CPM, BJP and Congress supporters clashed with police at Babupur panchayat in Malda’s Gazole after cops couldn’t trace missing CPM member Dipali Besra.
(With inputs from Monotosh Chakraborty, Falguni Banerjee, Suman Mandal, Sujoy Khanra, Subhro Maitra)