BHUBANESWAR: Wildlife experts have said that the recent discovery of elephant carcasses in Similipal Tiger Reserve, one on Sunday, with their tusks missing indicated the involvement of poachers.
On Sunday, the decomposed carcass of a jumbo was found in the reserve with both tusks missing. One and a half months ago, another elephant carcass that was burnt allegedly by forest personnel also had no tusks.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe forest department had said the tusks were removed but did not confirm it was the handiwork of poachers. The carcasses were also found in decomposed state which could indicate laxity in field patrolling, experts said. 
Sai Kiran, deputy director (Similipal north), said forensic teams and veterinary doctors have rushed to the site where the decomposed carcass was found to collect evidence to ascertain the cause of death. “Parts of the carcass have been sent to Odisha University of Agriculture and Technology (OUAT) for laboratory examination to ascertain what led to its death and how old the elephant was,” said Kiran.
Wildlife experts said tusks missing from decomposed carcasses can be inferred that poachers killed the pachyderms purportedly to extract their tusks. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo“It has been observed that in case of elephant death caused by electrocution (be it accidental or wire trap), tusks usually are not removed, which means angry villagers may have laid the trap to avenge loss of property or lives and in some cases because of sagging wires. But in case of decomposed carcass found deep inside the forest, tusks are removed. This indicates poaching,” said Biswajit Mohanty, secretary, Wildlife Society of Odisha (WSO), a private body working for wildlife conservation. 
The organisation claimed that on an average 80 elephants die in the state every year out of which 40 are killed by poachers. In many of these 40 deaths, their tusks were removed. 
In a decade prior to 2020, WSO revealed that of the 784 elephant deaths, 114 were killed by poachers, mostly for ivory, 79 died by electrocution trap laid by poachers, 45 due to sagging live wires, 26 in train accidents, six in road accidents and 11 due to drowning in wells and canals. 
The reasons behind deaths of 160 elephants are still not known as 113 were found in highly decomposed state.