Raipur: To combat poaching and illegal tree felling plaguing the Udanti Sitanadi Tiger Reserve management is pioneering an ingenious solution to their staff shortage crisis—enlist the help of local shepherds, who traverse every corner of the forest while grazing their cattle to fortify its surveillance network across all eight zones.
This initiative marks a significant step towards safeguarding the reserve's precious wildlife said, deputy director Varun Jain.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoHe said it is a first-of-its-kind endeavour in Udanti Sitanadi's history as well as in Chhattisgarh.
A symposium on wildlife conservation was organised at the Eco Centre of the Udanti Sitanadi Tiger Reserve on Feb 15, with about 50 shepherds and locals in attendance. Forest Minister Kedar Kashyap, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) Sudhir Agrawal, and Director M Mercybella inaugurated the symposium. Fifty Rangers were provided uniforms during the event, accompanied by awareness campaigns targeting local communities affected by prevalent wildlife crimes.
The Tiger Reserve spans approximately 125 square kilometers, serving as a vital wildlife corridor in the Gariaband district of Chhattisgarh. Encroachment, poaching, and illegal logging are prevalent issues in the area. Another major concern is that many wildlife-related incidents remain unreported due to dense forest cover, hindering effective law enforcement patrolling.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoIn the last year alone, 575 cases of encroachment came to light and were resolved. Additionally 114 poachers were apprehended in 30 operations, Jain said.
The deputy director of the Udanti Sitanadi Tiger Reserve said that a 40% shortage of field staff further hampers communication during emergencies. Consequently, despite the efforts of rangers/forest guards to patrol most parts of the forest, they can only cover 20%-40% of the total reserve area, while shepherds traverse the entire reserve. 
To incentivize shepherd involvement, an honorarium of Rs 5000 per case will be offered, utilizing funds provided by the state government that is meant for aiding informers. 
Methods such as setting traps, laying bait, and strategic poison placement will be employed to combat poaching. Rangers will continue to patrol the reserve perimeter and other sensitive wildlife areas, remaining vigilant despite limited resources and challenges.
Efforts are underway to integrate intelligence and surveillance to effectively combat poaching and smuggling, said an official. 
Confidential information will be shared with the Rangers for further action. Twenty six Gram Sabhas have been delegated community forest resource rights in about 40,000 hectares of the Tiger Reserve, instilling confidence in stakeholders.
Wall paintings will be used to raise awareness about wildlife conservation, and incentives will be provided for wildlife protection. said a forest officerEfforts to promote eco-tourism have also been initiated, he added.