Nagpur: One more tiger was found dead in Haturna beat under Ashti forest range in Wardha division. The irrigation department staff patrolling the Upper Wardha dam backwaters found the tiger carcass on Tuesday evening.
Acting DyCF of Wardha Tushar Dhamdhere said the tiger died a natural death and was around 12-13 years. “Its teeth were worn out and it must not be able to hunt.All the body parts of the animal were intact,” said Dhamdhere.
On March 23, two tigers were poached in Nagalwadi and Pandharkawda. The third death was also noticed on Tuesday but as it was growing dark, the formalities were completed on Wednesday. 
Meanwhile, the forest officials were groping in the dark on poaching of two tigers on Tuesday. A 4-year-old tigress died after its neck got entangled in a steel wire snare trap in Ghonsa in Maregaon range of Pandharkawda.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCPXHow to boost income with $249 Amazon investmentCPXLearn MoreUndoA highly decomposed carcass of a tiger with all its paws missing was found in compartment number 707 in the FDCM area in the Nagalwadi range adjoining Pench Tiger Reserve (PTR).
FDCM general manager Rishikesh Ranjan said, “The dog squad went 80 metres towards the road and failed to move further indicating that the criminals must have killed the tiger elsewhere and dumped in the forest. The carcass was 10-12 days old and hence post-mortem failed to reveal much.”
Ranjan said, “It seems to be a case of poaching by laying wire snares and not electrocution. The post-mortem was conducted as per NTCA SOP and further investigation is going on.” 
Pandharkawda deputy conservator Kiran Jagtap said, “The dog squad failed to give any clues but the staff is on the move. The trap was laid for herbivore but tigress got stuck into it.”
“As a precautionary step, we are starting an anti-snare drive in seven ranges of the division in the periphery of the villages and small nullahs. These drives will start ahead of Holi with the help of staff, Joint Forest Management (JFM) committees and local NGOs members,” said Jagtap.
“Earlier, in June 2019, then DyCF KM Abharna had initiated such a drive with the help of locals when a tiger was killed in wire snares. The drive delivered good results but these moves are temporary. The Pandharkawda division and Tipeshwar have a history of laying wire snares by locals but there is no alternative to foot patrolling,” says Yavatmal honorary wildlife warden Ramzan Virani.