Nagpur: Even as the forest officials tried to downplay the death of a three-year-old tigress in the Hingna range on Saturday, sources claimed that the big cat died due to choking in wire snares laid to trap herbivores for bushmeat.
This is the 22nd tiger death in Maharashtra in 2022, only the second highest after neighbouring Madhya Pradesh where as per the NTCA record 30 tigers have died to date this year.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
On Friday late evening, villagers informed forest officials about the tiger carcass in a perennial nullah in Chankapur in protected forest compartment number 151 in Neri Mankar beat. The spot is 40km from Nagpur.
On Saturday, after a spot panchnama, post mortem was performed on the animal. According to wildlife veterinarians, the tigress died of cardio respiratory failure, which may have occurred due to strangling.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreSources said during post mortem, a deep round scar was found on the neck due to a noose trap, either made of steel wire snares or nylon ropes. “As the water source was hardly 15cm deep, there were no chances at all of drowning. Atop a tree, some ropes were also found. The ropes must have been used to transport the carcass. One tigress claw was also recovered from the spot,” said sources.
They said no pugmark was seen in the 500 metre area around the spot, indicating that the animal was killed somewhere else and later dumped in the nullah at a secluded place, “ostensibly to destroy evidence”. A village is nearby and agricultural farms are 200 metre from the nullah.
Forest officials said forensic samples of the carcass have been sent to the regional lab in the city. Though a probe has not been launched from the poaching angle, investigating officials have been told to match the stripe pattern of the tigress with that of tigers in Bor. 
Poaching herbivores for bushmeat is rampant in the Hingna and Kalmeshwar ranges where there is the presence of resident tigers.
In India, 547 tiger mortalities were recorded from 2017- 2021, and 154 of these tigers lost their lives to poaching and illegal wildlife trade, according to the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA), a statutory body under the MoEFCC.
The 154 poaching incidents were attributed to seizure (55), poaching (33), poisoning (25), electrocution (22), snaring (9), and shooting (7), while there was insufficient data for three others.
The analysis of the data found that the 55 incidents of tiger-related seizure recorded in India show that every third tiger mortality (36%) is due to poaching attributed to seizures of tigers and their parts.