The President of the All India Bishnoi Society, Devendra Budiya, said on Monday that the community will consider forgiving Bollywood superstar Salman Khan in the 1998 blackbuck poaching case, if he issues a personal apology.
Khan, was accused of hunting down blackbucks at Bawad in Mathania near Jodhpur in September 1998, during the shooting of Sooraj Barjatya's film 'Hum Saath Saath Hain'.
Salman Khan house firing case: Man who financed recce outside Galaxy apartment lands in police net
Over the weekend, The actor's former girlfriend, Somy Ali appealed to the Bishnoi community to forgive the actor in the wake of the death threats by gangster Lawrence Bishnoi's members. She said, "I apologise on his behalf if he has made a mistake; please forgive him. Taking someone's life is not acceptable, be it Salman or an average common man."
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteDrive Finance ForwardCFA Institute
Reacting to Ali's statement, Devendra said, "If Salman himself apologises, the Bishnoi society will consider the apology. The mistake was not made by Somy Ali, but it was committed by Salman. Therefore, he should propose to the Bishnoi society that he wants to apologise."
"He should come to the temple and seek forgiveness. He should further take an oath that he will never make such a mistake in the future and will always work to protect wildlife and conserve the environment. If he does this, a decision of the society to forgive him will be considered."

Salman along with actors Tabu, Sonali Bendre, and Neelam were booked for hunting blackbucks while shooting for 'Hum Saath Saath Hain' in October 1998. He was also sentenced to five-year rigorous imprisonment in 2018, though he is out on bail presently.
On April 14, two miscreants opened fire at Salman Khan's Mumbai residence. The plot was believed to be hatched by jailed gangster Lawrence Bishnoi as a fallout of the blackbuck poaching case.
Did you know 'Mannat' was first offered to Salman Khan? Here's why he didn't buy it