Nagpur: The detection of two jaw traps used to poach tigers and leopards falling into it has revived decade-old memories of tiger poaching by organized gangs from the Baheliya community from Katni in Madhya Pradesh (MP).
In the last four days, two leopards were caught in these traps in the state. In the first case, a nine-year-old leopard was caught in a jaw trap in Kakad Shivni (Karanja Lad) on the farm owned by Prakash Kadam on February 4.The leopard was freed from the trap after being tranquilized and was shifted to the rescue centre in Paratwada, where it has recovered and will be reunited with its natural habitat soon.
In a similar incident on Tuesday, a one-year-old leopard was caught in a jaw trap in Khodshi, Karad, in western Maharashtra. The sub-adult animal was rescued by a forest team and the jaw trap was removed but its paw has been badly damaged due to deep wounds.
Satara deputy conservator of forests Mahadev Mohite said the presence of Baheliyas is not new in Karad. “We are investigating all angles. Two suspects have been rounded up,” he added. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoSatara honorary wildlife warden Rohan Bhate said that taking a cue from the series of wildlife body part seizures in the past and the trap on Tuesday, a red alert should be sounded by the department. 
The latest incidents are reminiscent of the history of tiger poaching cases in Maharashtra. As per the All India Tiger Estimation of 2018, India’s tiger population has increased by 33% — from 2,226 in 2014 to 2,967 in 2018. It is possible that organized gangs of poachers target tigers in the country.
As per the 2021 tiger estimation, Maharashtra has over 350 tigers and Baheliya poachers getting active cannot be ruled out. On April 25, 2020, a three-year-old leopard was trapped in a jaw trap on a farm in Khairi village on Asegaon-Daryapur road in the Paratwada range.
Poaching tigers for their body parts and skin by laying steel traps is the modus operandi of organized gangs of Baheliya poachers from Katni in MP. The leopards were targeted using the same traps.
The trap used in the Karanja Lad case is bigger and appears to be a tiger trap. The Karad trap is much smaller and essentially is a leopard trap. The organized tiger poaching gangs from MP and Haryana are always known to have contacts with local poachers for information on animal movement and for the safekeeping of traps.
Nitin Desai, director of Wildlife Protection Society of India, an NGO working for tiger conservation, said such local poachers may have tried their hands on these traps. “This has been established several times in the past. The best way would be to check the data dump of nearby cell towers to find out if any MP mobiles roaming in Maharashtra were logged on when the animals were trapped. We also need to look out for out localites with poaching history,” said Desai.
As reported by TOI, organized gangs of poachers removed at least 25 tigers from the Vidarbha region between October 2012 and May 2013. “In 2013, the Maharashtra forest department had nabbed over 100 tiger poachers from Baheliya community and their supporters harbouring them. More than 20 poachers were also convicted. However, many of them are still at large and these dreaded poachers may have become active again with local support,” said senior forest officials.
A forest officer probing the Karanja Lad trap case said all angles are being investigated. “Washim district has hamlets of Pardhis, who are traditional hunters for bushmeat. It is also possible that the trap was laid to kill herbivores. However, considering the presence of Baheliyas in Melghat earlier, all aspects are being explored,” the officer added.
Amravati honorary wildlife warden Sawan Deshmukh said there is a section of people in the region who make these traps. “Baheliya poachers may be using local poachers as sleeper cells to kill big cats because no one other than Baheliyas uses these traps,” Deshmukh added.