PATNA: While the JMM-led ruling coalition in Jharkhand and the Congress party in Bihar shifted their legislators to “safe hideouts” outside the two states amid reports of possible poaching ahead of the trust vote, the Left leadership is relaxed about their lawmakers and have not imposed any restrictions on their movements.
Left parties which comprise CPI-ML, CPI and the CPIM have a total of 16 MLAs in the state and obviously they will play a pivotal role in deciding the fate of any government.The seven-day-old Nitish Kumar-led NDA government in Bihar is to seek a trust vote on Feb 12.
The JMM-led Grand Alliance in Jharkhand shifted their MLAs to Hyderabad after the new government headed by Champai Soren took oath on Friday following resignation by incumbent CM Hemant Soren. And now, the Congress leadership in Bihar has shifted its legislators to the same location to keep a close watch on them and to ensure they don’t fall into the trap of lucrative offers by the rival camp in lieu of their support, reports said.
Strangely, nothing like that has been adopted by the Left despite the fact that they have 16 MLAs—only three less than the Congress’ tally of 19. The Left leaders said they are very confident of their elected representatives, and are 100 per cent sure that they can’t go against the party ideology.
“We are very confident that none can poach our MLAs since ideology is our capital. Our MLAs are freely moving in their respective constituencies to look into the grievances of the masses,” state CPI-ML secretary Kunal, who goes by one name, told the TOI on Sunday.
Stating that all their lawmakers are closely associated with the party ideology, Kunal said they couldn’t even think of their leaders switching loyalty. “We don’t confine our legislators since we have full faith in them,” Kunal said, adding, “Hame pura bharosa hai apne sathiypn par…unko kharida nahin ja sakta.”
He said all their legislators had won elections defeating the BJP candidates in the 2020 assembly elections and there is no question of them ditching the party. “Money power can’t influence them,” he claimed.
Of the total 16 MLA from the Left, 12 belong to the CPI-ML headed by Dipankar Bhattacharya. CPI and the CPIM have two members each, and they too have shown no fear of their small groups switching loyalty at a time when every single legislator is very high in demand in the state ahead of the trust vote.
“Both our legislators are roaming freely in their respective assembly constituencies, and we have not issued any instructions to them,” state CPI secretary Ram Naresh Pandey said. CPI has two MLAs. While Ram Ratan Singh was elected from Teghda, Suryakant Paswan won elections from Bakhari seat—both these assembly seats fall in Begusarai district.
CPIM secretary Lalan Chaudhary also displayed the same confidence in their two legislators—Ajay Kumar from Vibhutipur (Samastipur) and Satyendra Yadav from Majhi (Saran). “We don’t have any fear. Our MLAs are freely mixing with the people and holding meetings,” Chaudhary said adding, “Left ko (poaching ka) koi khatra nahi hain.” Stating there was no question of their MLAs switching sides, Chaudhary said they were not elected all of a sudden but after a long struggle.