COIMBATORE: Fifty years after Nilgiri tahr was last spotted in Sathyamangalam Tiger Reserve (STR), the TN forest department plans to reintroduce the state animal in the deep jungles of the reserve.
The department is identifying suitable habitations with adequate fodder and right elevation in STR where the tahrs can survive. STR is the only reserve in the state which doesn't have Nilgiris tahrs at present while they had been spotted in 140 blocks in Mudumalai Tiger Reserve, Anamalai Tiger Reserve, Srivilliputhur Megamalai Tiger Reserve and Kalakad Mundanthurai Tiger Reserve.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Once the reintroduction is done, STR too could boast of offering abodes to the state animal, said M G Ganesan, director, Project Nilgiri Tahr.
The exercise is part of 'Project Nilgiri Tahr' undertaken by Tamil Nadu govt at a cost of 25 crore. The forest department, however, has not fixed a deadline for the reintroduction process. "We plan to find grass hills in STR which offer the right habitat for Nilgiri tahrs. After a detailed study, we will introduce it in STR," said Ganesan.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo'Around 3,100 Nilgiri tahrs in the state's four tiger reserves' 
 According to an estimate by forest officials, there are about 3,100 Nilgiri tahrs in the state's four tiger reserves.
Forest officials attribute multiple reasons for the decline in Nilgiri tahr population. The foremost is that the tahr is an easy prey for predators. The next is poaching, followed by death due to forest fires. Tamil Nadu forest department has decided to conduct a nilgiri tahr census jointly with their Kerala counterparts in the western ghats from April 29 to May 1.
"We came to know that more than 100 varieties of plants eaten by Nilgiri tahrs were present in STR. But the entire herd of Nilgiri tahr vanished from the forest. We are planning to find the habitats in the STR," Ganesan said. 
He added that Nilgiri tahrs are spotted at heights of about 400 metres-2500 metres above mean sea level in western ghats.
STR begins in western ghats and stretches till eastern ghats. Tahrs were spotted here more than 50 years ago, but disappeared all of a sudden. "They might have been poached or killed by predators. There is also a possibility of forest fires killing tahrs in large numbers," said Ganesan.
Forest officials said they plan to release about five pairs of tahrs in STR. 
Chief wildlife warden Srinivas R Reddy said that right now, the forest department has been marking the habitats of Nilgiri tahr in the other four forest reserves. Once these habitats are marked and a population estimation is done, reintroduction process would begin.
Meanwhile, the forest department has sent 20 samples of faecal pellets of Nilgiri tahrs to the Advanced Institute for Wildlife Conservation (AIWC) at Vandalur in Chennai to extract DNA to determine the plants eaten by the Nilgiri tahr. Once identified, those plants would be grown in the identified habitats.