MADURAI: Sri Lankan navy on Saturday took custody of 22 Indian fishermen and their two dhows on charges of poaching in the territorial waters of Sri Lanka. These traditional fishermen, 11 each on a dhow, were on a multi-day fishing expedition and sailed from Pamban on November 14 and November 15. The dhows belonged to K Raj and Francis Cassier from Akkalmadam in Rameswaram Island.
According to the Sri Lankan navy, these two dhows were apprehended during a special drive to chase away Indian fishing crafts poaching in Sri Lankan waters.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe Northern Naval Command has deployed a fast attack craft to chase away a cluster of Indian trawlers and these two Indian dhows were detained during the operation off Point Pedro.
The apprehended fishermen and the crafts were taken to Kankesanthurai fishing harbour and they were later handed over to the Fisheries Inspector at Mailadi for onward legal proceedings. The Sri Lankan navy has seized 29 Indian poaching crafts and 196 fishermen in 2023, the Sri Lankan navy stated.
Meanwhile, the detention of dhows (country boats) by the Lankan navy has scared trawl boat owners of Rameswaram as the trawlers had gone fishing after a week due to turbulent weather conditions. Meanwhile, PMK leader S Ramadoss condemned the detention of fishermen stating that they were fishing in their traditional fishing grounds near Katchatheevu when arrested.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoRamadoss stated that the arrest comes after 64 Rameswaram fishermen were arrested recently and were released except for one fisherman who has been imprisoned for two years. The union government should summon the Sri Lankan ambassador in Delhi and warn the Island nation to stop these activities. The central government should take measures to release all Indian fishermen and boats from Sri Lankan custody, he stated.