NAGPUR: It is not just fragmented corridors, shrinking habitats and poaching that are threatening the country’s 3,682 tigers. Studies using intensive habitat monitoring for the last 16 years show that 72% of India’s forests have been hit by a variety of invasive plants. 

The tiger blueprint is an umbrella project under which many components of the ecosystems are monitored.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoIt helps in understanding trends in the population of other wildlife species, ecological changes in habitat and threats to ecosystems.
The ‘Status of tiger, co-predators’ report of 2023, which is released every four years with the most recent being on Tuesday by the National Tiger Conservation Authority, has reported the ecological status of India's forest habitats. The report shows that 2,54,880 sqkm (72%) out of the total sampled 3,58,551 sqkm area in the tiger habitats was found invaded by different plants that are not native to Indian ecosystems. The data for every tiger reserve is not made available yet.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoThis is the first of its kind report published by government agencies that shows how rapidly the forest conditions in India are changing due to invasions, climate change and land use change. 
The scientific models project that around 66% of India's total forest areas could be under the threat of invasive plants. These plants include 11 priority invasive plants like lantana camara, prosopis juliflora, mikania micrantha, and chromolaena odorata. These plants are known to competitively suppress India’s native plants, which are food for many herbivores.
If this food goes down, it could bring the numbers of wild herbivores down on which the population of tigers depend. A study led by Wildlife Institute of India’s Rajat Rastogi has established this relationship in Kanha Tiger Reserve.
The report also shows that in the last two decades, the invasive plants have been expanding across India at a rate of around 700 sqkm per year. The rapid expansion was found to be due to the increased human impacts on natural systems, nearness of invaded areas, changing soil moisture and changing climatic conditions.
More importantly, the report uses the invasion trajectory of these plants from the last two decades and combines it with several other biodiversity and financial parameters to identify those native forest areas, where management of invasive plants is urgently needed. Such priority areas are present across the core regions of the tiger reserve.
Totally, around 1.22 lakh sqkm were identified as India's top priority areas that must be saved from harmful impacts of invasive plants. These areas were calibrated in a way to maximize biodiversity returns, if the management is done urgently, and scientifically.
Lead author Dr Ninad Mungi says, “Now that India knows the threats from invasive plants and where to start, it needs long-term investments and actions for managing invasions and restoring native ecosystems. This needs concordance between protected areas, local people, the state, and the Centre. Development of the national policy on invasive alien species, as recommended by the National Wildlife Action Plan (NWAP) 2017-31, will be strengthened with this report.” 
There was less progress in making this policy due to a dearth of information, scientific expertise, and attention. Subject experts, funds, and projects have long been missing from prominent institutions, who can lead in policy making along with ministry and state forest departments. With the present invasion levels and restoration opportunities highlighted in the report, India must urgently develop a cohesive policy. 
WII’s Rajat Rastogi said, “Tiger reserves across India have the largest of the intact native forests. It highlights that the investments done for protecting habitats in the name of the tiger are also helping in conserving native systems. The report highlights that there is a good chance to restore tiger ecosystems using scientific methods.”
Rastogi adds, “India is among the few nations that have conducted such large-scale assessments of invasions for the last 16 years. It has helped in understanding the changing ecosystems and prioritizing restorations. Other tiger-ranging countries can benefit by adopting such monitoring schemes.”