PILIBHIT: Reckless poaching and illegal trade have pushed 25 of 29 native turtle species into the "red zone", posing a serious threat to its survival in India, as per data provided by Traffic India, a UK-based wildlife trade monitoring network of the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). 
Some of these endangered turtle species are being smuggled mainly via UP and West Bengal -- the states sharing borders with Nepal, Bangladesh and the northeast.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoKey airports of Mumbai, Chennai and Bengaluru are also considered as major entry and exit points.
Over 1 lakh tortoises and freshwater turtles found to be part of illegal trade in 19 states
As we mark World Turtle Day on May 23 (Tuesday), we are witnessing certain disturbing facts. The IUCN has enlisted 25 of the 29 species -- two tortoises and the rest freshwater turtles -- on its red list in India.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndo Several other species have been put under schedule I of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act. Red-crowned roofed turtle has been classified as critically endangered,” said Merwyn Fernandes, coordinator of Traffic India, on Monday. 
Fernandes pointed out that “at least 1,11,310 tortoises and freshwater turtles” were found to be part of the illegal trade in 19 states and two UTs in India within a span of 10 years between September 2009 and 2019, and over 11,000 people might be involved every year in this network. 
“UP and Bengal are the two major hubs accounting for over 60% of all seizures. Among 14 native species found to be traded, the Indian star tortoise accounted for 49%, followed by Indian softshell turtle (26%), Indian flapshell turtle (15%) and spotted pond turtle (9%),” Fernandes said. Sreeparna Dutta, project biologist at Turtle Survival Alliance, a US-based organisation, said, “Over 9,000 freshwater turtles were seized in UP, Bihar and Bengal between August 2020 and February 2021. In fact, 17 districts in UP registered record seizures. Regions of Etawah-Mainpuri-Agra, Sultanpur, Pratapgarh-Amethi, Unnao-Kanpur and Gonda-Bahraich-Pilibhit have emerged as key points in UP.” 
Experts stressed on the urgent need of a coordinated strategy for a massive search and rescue campaign to combat the illegal trade.