Bhubaneswar: There have been multiple seizures of leopard hides in the state recently, though wildlife experts claim the frequency of hunting leopards was far more than what is being reported.
Sources said leopard hunting comes to the fore only when the Special Task Force (STF) of the crime branch or the forest department personnel seize the hides. These seizures are made with the help of intelligence inputs.Many cases of wildlife trade and hunting are going unreported, they said. 
The seizure of hides indicates the vulnerability of big cats, while exposing yet again the illegal wildlife trade, which is suspected to be spreading outside the state, experts said. 
While the STF had earlier ruled out that the leopard parts from the state were smuggled for the international market, many former wildlife officers said the network of wildlife trafficking has not been specifically traced to outside the state because no concerted effort has been made to investigate the overseas link.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoBhanumitra Acharya, former honorary wildlife warden having three decades of experience in observing the Similipal Tiger Reserve, said that unless there is involvement of skilled hands in leopard hunting, its skin, claws and whiskers cannot be extracted so meticulously to ensure no part is damaged. 
“This is a full-fledged and organised racket that has been going on for years but both the forest department and police are in denial. I am not saying these are very highly coveted wildlife parts. But poaching is rampant. It is not an accidental or amateur exercise,” he observed.
Leopard hides are not as costly compared to parts of other animals. “On the ground, a leopard hide can at the most fetch Rs 25,000. If it manages to reach any foreign country, the price crosses Rs 1 lakh. There are traders involved and there is a conduit and at each stage, commission is also involved,” Acharya added.
In the overseas markets, the prices get marginally jacked up because the hide is tanned. Leopard skin tanning is not done in India, he said.
Prakash Gogineni, field director, Similipal, said leopards can be found in both buffer and core areas of a reserve or sanctuary and quite often close to human habitation. 
“It is not surprising that hunters target leopards well inside the sanctuary. Otherwise why would they come with firearms, arrows and bows? Experienced poachers only understand leopard behaviour. But I am not certainly aware about the trade,” he said.