JAIPUR: Big cats in Sariska Tiger Reserve (STR) are exposed to poaching and revenge killings because of defunct radio collars.
Currently, radio collars on the neck of all the five adult tigers — ST-10, ST-13, ST-2, ST-3 and ST-9 — are inoperative.
The state forest department will take up the issue during the meeting on the topic, ‘Midterm Review of Current Status of Sarsika Tiger Reserve Post Tiger Reintroduction, Tiger Translocation and Radio Collaring Strategies in the State of Rajasthan' scheduled in STR on February 3.
Chief wildlife warden (Rajasthan) Arindam Tomar said, "Discussions will be held with National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) and Wildlife Institute of India (WII) scientists. After the meeting, a decision will be taken to replace or remove the collars."
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoSTR, which is spread over 800 sqkm, is home to 25 tigers including 11 females, nine males and five cubs. Sources said without a functioning collar, it is difficult to monitor the movement of tigers in Sariska, which has numerous narrow valleys and sharp and high ridges. Moreover, constant vigil is crucial as big cats have territories near villages, which are notorious for snaring and poaching.
A source said, "Traces of male tiger ST-13 have not been found for the past 10 days following the recent rainfall. The collar of the tiger is defunct. Monitoring becomes easier if collars are functional. In 2018, tigress ST-5 fell victim to poaching right after its collar stopped working."
Environmentalists urged the NTCA and the forest department to immediately take a call on radio collars as these gadgets weighing between 1.4kg and 2kg are hung around the necks of tigers for many years. Dinesh Verma Durani, founder and general secretary of Sariska Tiger Foundation said, "Few collars haven't been working for the past several years. For instance, tigress ST-2 collar has been defunct since 2011. The gadget should be either replaced or removed."
Following the 2018 poaching debacle, the then standing committee of the State Board for Wildlife (SBWL) directed to replace the obsolete hand-held antenna collar system with the advanced GPS-enabled VHF collars. A project to replace the collars was initiated in 2018 which helped ST-9, ST-10 and ST-3 get new ones.
A source said, "In all, eight collars from Ranthambore was received for effective monitoring at STR. Radio collars of ST-9, ST-10 and ST-3 were replaced. These collars have also stopped functioning since the life of these gadgets is approximately 2 years."