RAJKOT: The Wildlife Circle of Gujarat forest department in a joint operation with the Indian Coast Guard (ICG) busted a dolphin poaching racket off the Porbandar coast on Wednesday evening and arrested 10 fishermen with 22 dead dolphins.
Dolphins fall under Schedule 1 of the Wildlife Protection Act (highly protected species) and it has also been declared as endangered species by The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe hunting of dolphins is prohibited under WP Act. In the Arabian Sea, dolphins are found on the coast of Porbandar, Dwarka, Okha and Jamnagar, said forest officials.
According to the forest officials, all 10 fishermen arrested for poaching were natives of Tamil Nadu, Odisha, Assam, Kerala and other states.
The Coast Guard got specific information about the poaching of marine mammals on the Porbandar coast. They informed the forest department and carried out a joint operation.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoDuring patrolling, ICG found a suspicious boat about 12 nautical miles from Porbandar coast with dead dolphins in it. Talking to TOI, Aaradhna Sahu chief conservator of forest (wildlife circle) said, "We have sent the carcass of dolphins for panel postmortem and arrested 10 fishermen. They have been booked under the relevant sections of WP Act for poaching a protected marine mammal."
The accused include Sansuman Basumatri (21) and Ranjit Boro (28) from Assam; Nihal Kunanchery (26) and Giltus Muppakudi (62) from Kerala; Selvan Surlesh (46), Rajkumar Tanisharaj (52), Aarun Pillai (47), Anthony Barla (50) and Saujin Susayarul (36), all residents of Tamil Nadu; Mayadhar Raut (37) of Odisha.
Forest officials said that they were probing the trafficking of the protected species. They also seized four shark carcasses from the boat.
According to the sources, sometimes dolphins are used as bait to capture larger marine mammals. The dolphins are traded for various purposes like flesh and oil.
The forest officials said that they were probing the purpose of dolphin hunting and whether it was being sold in the international markets. They are also trying to find out if such hunting expeditions were executed in the past.