Raipur: In shocking revelation in the tiger poaching case of Indravati Tiger Reserve in Bijapur district, it was found that a Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel from battalion 222 was involved in fixing the deal worth Rs 13 lakh for smuggling of tiger skin.
Earlier, 13 persons involved in the matter were arrested while six others are at large including the CRPF personnel and two cops.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Dhammashil Ganvir, deputy director of the Indravati Tiger Reserve on Thursday told reporters that the chief poacher arrested in the case has confessed during interrogation that a CRPF personnel Amit Jha had fixed a deal for smuggling tiger skin for Rs 13 lakh and had given an advance amount of Rs 7.5 lakh to the poacher.
However, before the tiger skin could be delivered, the joint efforts of Udanti Sitanadi anti-poaching team and Indravati Tiger Reserve searched Rudraram village of the Reserve and arrested seven persons then two more on June 30 and July 3 respectively. A total of 13 persons have been arrested till date.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe team on Monday had visited a village Kondamausam, where they found the bones of a tiger buried and noose they used to trap the big cat that caused its death due to choking. The remains will be sent for forensic test in Jabalpur laboratory.
Dhammashil said that when forest department inquired with CRPF senior officials, they said that Jha was in Delhi on leave. Dhammashil said that they have asked to summon Jha and a detailed information about him has been sought.
He said that another accused in his statement said that the trap was laid to catch the tiger at Kondamausam village in Bhopalpattanam on the border Maharashtra. 
The arrested individuals include Aarti Das, Vikram Thakur, Pritam Lal Sahu, Tameshwar Jain, Kaka Deepak, Manoj Kursam, and Kishore Dashrahiya among others. 
The skin was 2.15m-long and 1m-wide.TNN