Nagpur: With the dust yet to settle over a Maharashtra tiger’s skin seized in Assam, one more case of tiger poaching from Salekasa in Gondia forest division has been unearthed by Chhattisgarh forest officials.
Chhattisgarh forest team led by deputy conservators (DyCFs) Varun Jain and Dhammashil Ganvir from Indravati Tiger Reserve stumbled upon the Salekasa tiger poaching case while investigating seizure of another tiger skin in the Madded buffer range of Sitanadi-Udanti Tiger Reserve (USTR) in Bijapur district.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
The USTR tiger skin was seized on July 3, and nine accused were arrested. Till now, more than 22 accused have been arrested. These include 11 from Aamgaon, Sakoli, and Salekasa in Gondia, two from Gondpipri in Chandrapur, and nine from Chhattisgarh.
Sources said the Salekasa tiger was electrocuted in Sherpar forest in February this year but as staff and officials never visit the remote area, poachers had the last laugh.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo“The accused in both the tiger skin cases are hand in glove. The Salekasa tiger was killed in February but we could not get the skin as it was destroyed in rains and later forest fires,” said sources.
The Salekasa connection came to light while interrogating some of the accused from Rajnandgaon and Dongargarh. On the basis of their statements, Chhattisgarh officials nabbed the kingpin from Salekasa.
Sources said, “As Salekasa falls in Navegaon-Nagzira and Kanha tiger reserves, the gang must have poached tigers earlier too. There are two types of links in the case. One is the involvement of local poachers selling tiger body parts to those involved in performing black magic and luck-enhancing superstitions, and another is selling skin to big traders.” 
Officials said they have arrested a CRPF sub-inspector for striking a deal with the Salekasa tiger poachers. The main accused have been identified as Shalik Markam (55), Suraj Markam (45), and Jiyaram Markam from Salekasa.
The three electrocuted the tiger and animal bones were seized from the spot. The other accused, who helped the main accused to sell the skin and body parts, include Gendlal Bhoyar (55), Labhandharni, Tukaram Baghele (59), Bhadipar, Angraj Katre (67), Darbada, Waman Funde (60), Sindhitola, Shyamrao Shivankar (53), railway employee Jitendra Pandit, Amgaon, Yadavrao Pandhre, Bodra, and Ashok Khotele, Gondia.
The stripe pattern of the tiger skin seized from Bijapur district is being matched with the database with NTCA to see whether it belongs to Chhattisgarh or Maharashtra.