HYDERABAD: Less than an hour after Jharkhand Mukti Morcha-coalition MLAs left Hyderabad for Ranchi on Sunday, a group of 16 Congress legislators from Bihar flew into the city to avoid possible poaching by chief minister Nitish Kumar-led alliance, which is going for a floor test on February 12. 
Hyderabad is emerging as the “centre of resort politics” as many as 39 JMM-led coalition MLAs, comprising those from Congress and RJD too, were accommodated at a resort at Shamirpet on the outskirts of the city since Friday onwards till they left on Sunday.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoEarlier in May 2018, the then chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao-led BRS govt had accommodated Karnataka JD (S) MLAs at a star hotel in Hi-Tec City and Pradesh Congress Committee took care of Congress MLAs from Karnataka at another hotel in Banjara Hills.

Now, Congress MLAs from Bihar have been moved to a resort in Ibrahimpatnam, about 36 km from the city. AICC secretary S A Sampath Kumar and Ibrahimpatnam MLA Malreddy Ranga Reddy have been given the responsibility of taking care of these MLAs from Bihar. “More MLAs from Bihar are expected to come to Hyderabad and may stay up to February 10 or 11, and go back in time for the floor test on February 12 in the Bihar assembly,” a senior Congress leader said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoSampath said the Jharkhand political chapter was over and now the Bihar episode started in Hyderabad. Telangana, under the rule of Congress, is a secure state for safekeeping of MLAs from other states. “We are committed to safeguarding democracy,” he added. 
Sources said the decision to relocate the MLAs from Bihar was taken keeping in view the concerns over reports of JD (U) getting in touch with some Congress MLAs in Bihar. Sending them to Hyderabad is seen as a precautionary measure to prevent possible poaching before the floor test. 
Though the exact number of MLAs arriving here from Bihar is yet to be known, sources said Bihar Congress president Akhilesh Singh and Bihar former PCC president Madan Mohan Jha were part of the delegation. There is also a talk that these MLAs flew into Hyderabad via Delhi.