Chandrapur: The human kill incident in Doni forest under Mul (buffer) range of Tadoba Andhari Tiger Reserve (TATR) has taken a twist after forest department booked president of Ulgulan Sanghatana and Bahujan Vanchit Aghadi leader Raju Zode for supplying tiger traps to poachers. 
An offence under Section 9 of Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, has been registered against Zode, said investigation officer.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
One Bharat Kove from Doni village was killed by tiger in buffer forest close to the village on December 30. After his body was recovered the following day, forest department confirmed it as kill made by tiger and had given ex gratia aid of Rs25,000 to the kin. 
However, on the very next day, investigations revealed presence of tiger traps in the area where Kove was killed.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreForesters then booked four people in the case and summoned them for inquiry. Tribal leader Zode along with his supporters had gone to Doni demanding release of the four. He had alleged that the four were beaten mercilessly to get confessional statement that they along with Kove were out to put tiger traps in the forest and Kove got killed after tiger charged at them. 
Zode led villagers from Doni and Fulzari to SP Arvind Salve to narrate their woes. He had also filed a criminal complaint against the foresters involved in the alleged beating of tribal youths. 
Miffed by repeated hurdles created by Zode, Chandrapur unit of Forest Rangers’ Association had met SP Salve and demanded registering offence against Zode under Section 153 for obstructing the execution of duty. 
While no such offence was registered by police, Mul (buffer) range officer, however, went ahead to book Zode for his involvement with the four accused in Doni case. Zode has been charged with supplying the traps to the accused poachers to capture and kill tiger. 
Zode rubbished the allegation and charged that forest department is miffed with him for exposing their brutality and torture of the innocent tribals and dalits living in forests. He alleged forest department is incriminating him with false charges. 
The tribal leader had planned a protest march against the atrocities of TATR buffer officials on Wednesday, but called it off following Covid restrictions.
Zode presented two accused — Manoj Marape and Rupesh Naitam — before the media, who claimed they were brutally tortured by RFO Naigamkar and his subordinates to force them sign on blank pages and give statement before video camera claiming that traps were supplied by Zode. 
The entire case is fabricated and they have never met Zode before he came to rescue them from the inhuman torture by forest officials, said Marape and Naitam. 
Investigation officer ACF Yede confirmed registering case against Zode for supplying poaching traps. He said the offence has been registered based on the written statement given by the accused. He claimed that Zode had been summoned for questioning and his statement has been recorded, but not arrested. 
“We are investigating the matter and have sought call data record (CDR) to verify if there is any connection between the accused and Zode,” he said.