RANCHI: With two more UPA MLAs flown to Raipur on Wednesday amid concerns of poaching by BJP, the main opposition party once against refuted the charges, claiming that the picnic-gigs and 'resort politics' by the ruling camp was only to deflect the attention and set a new narrative.
"Completely rubbish allegations. Our contention in EC against CM was about office of profit and corruption.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoIf reports are true, he is set to be disqualified anytime. Hence, to prevent face loss among public of CM's disqualification on corruption grounds, they are weaving a story of poaching attempts by BJP," senior BJP spokesperson Pratul Shahdeo said. 
Shahdeo said the saffron camp has been fighting on various issues ever since the UPA government came into power. "The biggest of them all today is lawlessness, and corruption. But they are trying to give a different spin by levelling horse-trading charge," he said.
Earlier in the day, different units of BJP held protest marches holding pitchers (ghada) to symbolise that 'paap ka ghada' is filled to the brim and is going to collapse for the Hemant Soren government, across the state asking for better law and order, end to appeasement politics among others. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreTalking to reporters, state party president Deepak Prakash said, "Yeh sarkar ka paapon ka gadha bhar gaya hai. Junta ab ghada fodegi (This government's sins have reached nadir. People will teach them a lesson now)." 
The saffron camp since last three days has upped the ante against the Soren government, following the death of a Class XII girl in Dumka after she was charred to death by her jilted lover. 
Acid attack on another minor in similar one-sided love affair gone awry case too was being raked by BJP since Tuesday citing law and order collapse.
Congress's national spokesperson Gaurabh Vallabh hit back at the BJP, calling it anti-tribal. "For BJP, tribals are just vote-bank as per their convenience. Our PM and home minister who claim to feel for tribals, still haven't spoken a word on this horrendous incident," he said.