HYDERABAD: Telangana chief minister K Chandrasekhar Rao on Sunday indicated that the alleged cash-for-defection scandal engineered by BJP was only the tip of an iceberg. Addressing the crowd at Chandur in Munugode, the chief minister said, “A mammoth conspiracy was hatched to topple the Telangana government by purchasing 20 to 30 MLAs. More information will come out.We have evidence that could shake the seat of power in Delhi. 
The matter is in court and I cannot say more. Or else they would say I am influencing the course of investigation.” “Don’t succumb to offers. Vote is the biggest weapon you have to improve your lives. If you vote carelessly despite knowing the snake will bite you, you will end up burning down your own houses. Don’t remain mum as silence will allow them to continue their greed of power,” said KCR. The legislators proved selfrespect of Telangana cannot be bought and leaders like them are needed to save the country from communal and pro-corporate BJP, said KCR, while introducing the four MLAs — Pilot Rohith Reddy, Guvvala Balraju, Rega Kantha Rao and B Harshavardhan Reddy — on the dais. They had accompanied the CM in his chopper from Begumpet airport to the rally venue. 
Later, launching a diatribe against the BJP government, the chief minister said the Modi-government has burdened weavers by imposing a 5% GST. Not a single vote of weaver should go to BJP. All welfare schemes will continue as long as KCR is alive, he said. Stating that the bypoll was not necessary and it was forced upon the people, KCR said people of Munugode have got a golden opportunity to teach BJP a lesson by voting TRS to victory and laying the foundation for BRS national party. 
“Send a clear message toBJP that you want your river water share, you are against price rise, privatisation, antifarmer and anti-poor policies. BJP is against welfare schemes extended to you all. Power reforms will not end with fixing meters in agriculture fields, but also in your residences at `30,000 each. If discoms are privatised, who will fix the price,” he asked. With folded hands, he appealed to people to force the BJP candidate to forfeit the lection deposit. TRS victory in the by-poll should be a slap on their face and an eye opener that their dramas will not be tolerated, he added. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoHYDERABAD:Speaking about the fluoride problem in Nalgonda, the CM said that it was the TRS government that resolved it, not the centre. “Are eight years not enough to allocate Telangana its rightful share of river water for the Modi-government? There is abundant water but the people in several parts of the country are suffering due to lack of it,” he said while asking the gathering if they would want a government that would install electricity meters not only in agricultural fields. “Do you want such a government? A circular by PM Modi’s office says discoms will fix meters at homes too at the price fixed by them. We need to kick out this BJP government and dump it in the Bay of Bengal to better our lives,” he said