Hyderabad: While Hyderabad police were probing the alleged phone tapping case, they stumbled upon contact numbers of a few persons linked to the BRS MLAs’ poaching case of 2022.
Sources said arrested officers, especially those from Special Intelligence Bureau (SIB), were questioned about how they got a tip-off about the alleged poaching bid and was it through phone tapping they got information. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
The profiles of different persons linked to the case were reportedly found and they were asked about the reason behind keeping them under tabs. 
Cyberabad police had raided a farmhouse at Moinabad in Oct 2022 and arrested three people for allegedly trying to lure BRS legislators by offering huge sums of money to each of them. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoCyberabad police claimed that then Tandur MLA Pilot Rohit Reddy and three other MLAs from BRS were allegedly lured by three persons — Ramchandra Bharathi, Nanda Kumar and Simhayaji — at the behest of BJP. 
Later, the then chief minister released audio and video clips of the poaching bid, which was busted on the alert given by Rohit Reddy. 
Apart from the video of the alleged trap at Rohit Reddy’s farmhouse, three audio clips of alleged conversations of the accused also came out. Now, police are probing whether the clips which came out as a result of the taping done by SIB. 
It is learnt that the questioning in the MLA poaching case was done briefly and that too informally as they are sticking to the core aspect of SIB’s complaint — erasing data, destruction of data and profiling of various persons by the previous dispensation. 
When TOI contacted an accused in the case, Nanda Kumar, if he suspects that his phone was tapped, he said: “If the Cyberabad police allegation by then leaking three audio clips to media are true, my question is how did they get it? Did they tap our phones?’’ However, he was unwilling to get into the authenticity of the content in the audio files. 
It was while probing the profiles of people, the MLA poaching case-linked persons came under their scanner. However, the poaching case is pending before the Supreme Court. 
Meanwhile, in the phone tapping case, Panjagutta police submitted the confession report of the arrested Task Force former DCP Radha Kishan Rao in a sealed cover to the Nampally court. Also, bail applications moved by Radha Kishan Rao, Tirupathanna and others were expected to be heard by the court on Monday.