KOLKATA: Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee on Tuesday emphasised the need for opposition unity against BJP at the national level, sending out signals that the state’s lone Congress MLA joining Trinamool would not impact these efforts. 
“Nitish ji (Bihar CM Nitish Kumar) had come to Kolkata. I had a discussion with him following which there is going to be a meeting of opposition parties in Patna on June 12.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoHaving a meeting in Patna is significant because Patna was the turf of Jaiprakash Narayan. There had been so many meetings in Delhi, but there was no follow-up. Nitish ji rang me yesterday (Monday). I told him I am going,” she said. 
Congress general secretary Jairam Ramesh took on Trinamool a day after Sagardighi MLA Bayron Biswas joined the party. Ramesh tweeted on his personal handle that such “poaching” was not designed to “strengthen opposition unity” and only “served BJP’s objectives”.
“Three months after he was elected as a Congress MLA in a historic victory Bayron Biswas has been lured away by the TMC in West Bengal. This is a complete betrayal of the mandate of the people of the Sagardighi assembly constituency,” he said on Twitter.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo“Such poaching which has happened earlier in Goa, Meghalaya, Tripura and other states is not designed to strengthen Opposition unity and only serves the BJP’s objectives,” he wrote.
Banerjee took exception to Ramesh’s reference to the three states. “The Congress leader has mentioned where we contested. He didn’t name states like Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh where we didn’t. We also need to have a presence in states outside Bengal for garnering the vote percentage required to have the status of a national party. It is true the Congress had won the Sagardighi seat. But how many seats did they contest in the assembly elections?” she said.
Biswas joined Trinamool on Monday in the presence of Abhishek Banerjee, just weeks after the Trinamool national general secretary announced at a Murshidabad rally that he wanted the Sagardighi MLA to meet the CM on development of the constituency.
Days after this, the MLA had moved the Calcutta High Court seeking security. In his petition, Biswas said he was getting threatening calls on his visits to the constituency.
Trinamool Rajya Sabha member Santanu Sen contested the “poaching” claim by Congress, saying that Trinamool was well above the majority mark in the assembly and didn’t need members from other parties for the government to survive. “Our members in the assembly have been increasing since 2011. We won 213 seats of the total 294 in the 2021 assembly elections. At present, our strength is much more than that,” Sen said.
He instead blamed Congress for tying up with CPM in the Sagardighi bypolls. “Congress has betrayed its supporters by forging an alliance with CPM after hundreds of Congress workers had been killed during Left rule. Congress even went into an electoral agreement with ISF along with CPM in the 2021 assembly polls,” the MP said.