HYDERABAD: With Bharat Rashtra Samithi going all-out to expand its footprint in neighbouring Maharashtra by poaching NCP leaders, the Sharad Pawar-led party plans to retaliate by contesting 100 assembly seats in the upcoming Telangana elections, in a bid to queer the pitch for K Chandrasekhar Rao's BRS.
NCP sources said the party had started identifying candidates and opening offices in Telangana.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
The NCP leadership is upset after BRS lured its senior leaders from Nanded, Sholapur, Latur, Ahmednagar and Aurangabad, including state vice-president S Ghanshyam, OBC cell head Sanjay Anandkar and senior leader Gunwantrao from Latur.
"NCP will contest 100 seats in Telangana, especially in Mancherial, Asifabad, Adilabad, Nirmal and Nizamabad districts bordering Maharashtra. We will also enter the fray from some seats in Greater Hyderabad and Mahabubnagar district," Raje Dharmarao Baba Atram, the party's Telangana in-charge, told TOI from Aheri on Friday.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoDharamarao is an MLA from Aheri assembly constituency in Gadchiroli, which shares a border with Telangana, and served as a minister for three terms. He inaugurated the party office in Bellampally constituency in Mancherial on Thursday.
Asserting it wasn’t a sudden decision to contest in Telangana, the NCP leader said the party had fielded 52 candidates in 2018 assembly polls and secured 2% vote share. “In Mahabubnagar, our candidate polled more votes than BJP,” he claimed. The NCP leadership is scouting for a state president in Telangana as previous chief, Samala Ravinder, an advocate, quit the party last October. “We also have plans to appoint a full-time state committee ahead of assembly polls,” a party leader said.
Reacting to BRS forays into Maharashtra, he said KCR’s party had made false promises about 24x7 power and implementing Rythu Bandhu and other schemes. “Telangana government has not given compensation to farmers who lost land in Medigadda barrage, while Maharashtra paid ₹ 25 crore to farmers on its side. The BRS could not do justice to their own farmers; how can they do justice to farmers of other states?” he asked.