Nagpur: A sessions court at Gadchiroli has rejected anticipatory bail application of Misram Raghunath Jakhar (81), mastermind of organized gangs of Bawaria poachers aka Chacha, who was arrested in Dwarka in Delhi but was granted transit bail.
Based on interrogation of 12 Bawaria poachers arrested from Gadchiroli, Jakhar was booked on July 23 by Chatgaon RFO under various sections of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, in connection with poaching of two tigers in compartment number 413 in Ambeshivni, 15km from Gadchiroli.

On July 31, a team of Maharashtra forest department and Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB) raided the Jakhar house in Dwarka (Delhi) and seized ₹14.80 lakh cash. He was arrested and produced before duty metropolitan magistrate, Dwarka, for transit remand. However, the accused was granted transit bail till August 3.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoFearing arrest as the 3-day deadline neared, Jakhar, who is known as Chacha among poachers, applied anticipatory bail saying he is sick and suffering from several ailments due to old age. Jakhar said that he has permanent residence and will not abscond if granted bail.
The application was countered by the respondent forest department arguing that Jakhar’s role was significant as an arrested poacher Sonu Singh, who transported the tiger skin to Assam from Gadchiroli, had shared some amount with Jakhar from the ₹10 lakh received by trading the skin.
Jakhar also had several links with various groups involved in animal parts trade. The cash ₹14.80 lakh seized from Jakhar was also received from wildlife traders, the forest department said.
In this connection, statement of Jakhar’s granddaughter Vina was also recorded. She disclosed that a certain amount from the tiger trade was transferred to her bank account, which was subsequently routed to Jakhar’s account.
The forest department contended that there is material to prove Jakhar’s involvement in the case and pleaded that as the matter has national importance, his bail plea needs to be rejected.
Counsel for Chacha, DH Sharma, said that Jakhar, a former officer of Delhi forest department, is being framed in the case. He also submitted that the applicant is 80 years old and is suffering from several ailments and his arrest may pose danger to his life.
Additional sessions judge Uttam M Mudholkar said there is incriminating material against the applicant and the matter is a serious.
“Trading of tiger body parts has spread not only in India but on international level. The scope of the investigation is very wide as people from states like Assam are also involved, and hence the bail application of Chacha is rejected,” the court said.
TATR field director and conservator Dr Jitendra Ramgaonkar said, “Our team will visit Delhi, maybe with a medical professional to take care of the accused during the transit.”