Richie Mehta, the Emmy Award-winning director of Delhi Crime, is back with the eight-part Amazon Original series, Poacher, that dives deep into the investigation of elephant poaching. Alia Bhatt is on board as the executive producer of the gripping crime thriller that is inspired by true events. Ahead of its global premiere today, Alia and Richie talk to Bombay Times about the universal appeal of crime thrillers and making content that becomes a conversation starter.PollWhich Bollywood star's South debut in 2024 are you most excited about?Janhvi KapoorSaif Ali KhanBobby DeolShanaya KapoorExcerpts:
Richie, you made the much-acclaimed Delhi Crime and now Poacher, an 8-part web series. Your love for investigative crime thrillers, cop procedurals is evident. What draws you to this genre? 
I stumbled upon Delhi crime. We had to improvise our style and nature of tone on that. It found an audience. I was so tired after DC as I was researching this project, the only thing that my brain could digest were thrillers. I find it to be the most fun genre to watch. Thrillers are interesting vehicles to talk about a lot of different things because they are easy to swallow, it’s like pizza. You can put anything on it but it’s still pizza, it’s fun. And then there’s police procedural. When I met these real-life crime fighters, it was the coolest job description I had heard in my life. I started to understand their job. It basically takes everything you understand about police and exponentially multiplies it because they are scientists, biologists, forest experts and cops all in one. Law enforcement is just one of their jobs. I thought, if the whole world is consuming thrillers-police procedural, we all love it, I love it, so why don’t we use that to talk about something (poaching) that’s only being addressed in documentaries. Whether you engage with the theme or not as a human being is up to you. But at the very least, I am going to string you along and I hope you get to the last shot of episode 8. That’s what this is all about.
Richie Mehta and Alia Bhatt
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoAlia, environmental conservation is often dismissed as an elitist cause when anyone raises a voice. Isn’t it strange since breathing clean air is the basic need of survival.
That has become a stronger voice maybe because it has a negative tone. As Richie said, we didn’t even know that there are real life crime fighters. They are clearly not elitist; they are very much a part of our society and work towards reforms to keep things in control. They are a part of our basic law and order. What happens is whenever there’s contradictory conversation, for instance, someone saying, “I love the planet, but I am a non-vegetarian. I am this but I am that”, you can pick on that one thing and sit and talk about it like it’s elitist. But that’s up to that person. You can’t tell people what to say and what to feel. If they naturally feel responsible through mediums like these (series, docus, media), it’s great. If you feel responsible and add to the collective voice of reason in your own way, that’s never a bad thing, right?
Richie: Exploitation is in every industry. At the highest-level people make a lot of money and people at the lowest level suffer the most. This is exactly the opposite to the notion that Environment conservation is an elitist cause. Episode 6 of the series is very much about poachers. I show where they live and the lifestyle they have. It isn’t elitist. They live in the forest and are integrated in that environment. Nimisha Sajayan plays this character called Mala and her entire character journey is about this idea you are talking about. When she realizes what her father was doing, her conscience rebels against that. How she tries to atone for that is her story.
Has it become harder than ever to care about anything? Everything is disregarded as someone else’s issue. What are your thoughts on apathy?
Richie: If I see complacency and apathy around me, I will address that. Stories should shake humanity, not just a country but the world. The Nirbhaya case (which inspired Delhi Crime season 1) didn’t have that problem because everyone was talking about it. In the case of poaching, apathy is absolutely an issue. That’s why Poacher begins the way it does. Just to say, by the way you might be apathetic or ambivalent about it, but I am going to show you what this means.
Alia: When you dismiss issues as someone else’s problem, eventually it will all become our problem. There’s a beautiful line in the show which talks about how we are all connected. I like to focus on what’s working instead of what’s not working. I did not know how the forest department works and the sacrifices they make, until I saw Poacher. I like to focus on what good people are doing and how they care.
Roshan Mathew and Nimisha Sajayan in Poacher
Alia, as an actor, you are an eclectic blend of fierce and filmy given your choice of characters. As a producer, be it Darlings, Jigra or Poacher, what draws you to these projects?
What I like to view as an audience is what I like to support. When a piece of art or content moves you, you know it’s powerful. The intention is to give people a viewing experience which is entertaining, but also something to think about. Something that lingers on. Be it Darlings or Jigra, both are unique. Poacher was different because I wasn’t a part of its inception. If a story is good, the world should see it, it doesn't matter what you are doing in that story. The endeavor was to get it to the world. Eventually it’s the content that does the talking. When you play that first episode and start binging it, you can’t stop watching and all this conversation leaves the room. All of this is just a leadup to that.
Richie: Someone like Alia coming on board makes an immense difference. There’s an awareness that goes out to the world, there’s a mainstream aspect to it. The goal is to get you to press play. The rest is on us as content creators. If we don’t earn your allegiance, it’s our fault. Does her presence steer more people to press play on the series, of course it does. I am not making this for an elite audience. I am making it for a singular audience. 
Be it The Elephant Whisperers winning an Oscar, or Poacher premiering at the Sundance film festival. How important is it to begin this dialogue on environment and wildlife conservation and take it to an international platform?
Richie: Alia and I, we both are parents. The first animal my toddler daughter fell in love with was an elephant. Most kids love elephants, they are the most recognizable, charismatic species in the world. They only exist in two regions of the world and India is one of them. If I want to talk about conservation using these species it has to be either Africa or India. It’s me so I will do something in India, and the story will emerge from here. It’s a vehicle that talks about human beings’ relationship with everything on earth through the eyes and lens of people who are kicking ass. They are warriors. 
Alia: Message spreading never stops. It’s not like we are the only ones who are starting the dialogue. There are a lot of people who are speaking about it, and we should never stop until it’s a non-existent problem, which it’ll never be. At the end of the day, it’s all about empathy and kindness that I keep going back to. That is most essential for living.
Richie Mehta
What was your biggest takeaway from Poacher?
Richie: A lot of conservationists I spoke to, I asked them, ‘Do you believe your work can avert extinction?’ and every single one of them said no. They said they can’t stop it from happening, but they can delay it by 5,10,50 years or by a generation and that’s good enough. When I heard that I said, ‘I want to be on your side even if it’s a losing fight.’ These are optimists in a cynical world, which is the story we are telling. The show is 8 episodes long, 6.5 hours of content, I hope that young people can see how inspiring, fun, and thrilling it can be to be a crusader on behalf of your ideals. 
Alia: They are doing the work; Richie is showcasing it, and I am saying, hey, watch it (smiles). The series has some fabulous performances by Nimisha Sajayan, Roshan Mathew and Dibyendu Bhattacharya. The cast is outstanding, and I have favourite moments of each character that are etched in my mind. This has some of the most impactful acting I have seen. The show comprises guilt, thrill, that feeling of wanting to do something but not knowing how to and yet thinking about it, every moment is genuine and gripping. That one shot, the expression of Nimisha at the end of the show to me, was a masterclass in acting. It encapsulates the whole show and I was in tears at that moment. It shook me.