Nagpur: Forest officials have confirmed that the tiger skin and body parts seized from poachers in Assam are of a big tiger from a forest area bordering Chandrapur-Gadchiroli. A team led by senior wildlife officials will be heading to Guwahati in a day or two to probe the case.
On June 28, the Assam police arrested four persons belonging to the Bawaria tribe from Haryana and confiscated a nine-foot-long tiger skin and nearly 19kg bones in Guwahati.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoLater, the Kamrup forest officials also arrested one more person involved in the case and are still investigating the case. Prima facie it is learnt that the tiger was poached from Mul-Saoli.
Repeated attempts to contact Tadoba officials probing the case proved futile. However, TOI sources say a seven-member team constituted by the chief wildlife warden is engaged in intense data collection on poaching. 
Talking to TOI, state PCCF (wildlife) Maheep Gupta said, “I still have no confirmed communication that the tiger skin that was seized from Guwahati was from here. However, it is true that as per the call detail record (CDR) identified by the Melghat cyber cell, the movement of these poachers was in Gadchiroli and Chandrapur districts in the last 3-4 months.”
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoGupta said, “As part of the strategy, Tadoba field director Dr Jitendra Ramgaonkar and deputy director (core) Nandkishore Kale, and a few other officials will visit Assam in a day or two. The team will talk to Guwahati police and forest officials investigating the case. Our team will also interrogate the accused.”
“If the team finds substance in the case after recording statements of the accused, we will proceed with further action in the matter. We have also taken legal opinion in the matter and another preliminary offence report (POR) cannot be registered as one has already been filed,” said Gupta.
Earlier, a seven-member team under Kale with four RFOs and two ACFs as its members was set up on July 3. This team was constituted in the backdrop of the red alert sounded by the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB). The team will monitor all the tiger-bearing areas and gather intelligence on poachers.
However, WCCB sources say the organized gangs of Bawarias who were stationed in Chamorshi, Gadchiroli, Chandrapur, and Bramhapuri forest areas for more than four months cannot have been there for personal work or sight seeing. “They must have targeted several tigers as it was their fourth trip when they were caught by the Assam police,” they said.
This means all the SOPs made after the big Melghat/Nagpur case in 2013 were meaningless, as neither a single police patil gave any alert about the presence of outsiders nor did any patrolling party encounter a poacher in the forest.
“To top it all, even the tiger monitoring teams failed to report missing tigers. The presence of these gangs in the landscape for at least seven months could easily mean that they took away more than 10 tigers. However, a deep investigation can only unravel the truth,” said former officials associated with the tiger poaching investigations in 2013.
“We welcome PCCF (wildlife) decision. It is the Maharashtra wildlife wing that has to take a call. Assam forest department will not take the issue seriously as the tiger doesn’t belong to their area. The accused are in magisterial custody. Once they are out on bail, it will make things difficult,” said a section of WCCB officials.