PANAJI: Wild boar poachers who were caught slaughtering the protected animals, on Tuesday, were colluding with a woman from Petkem, Dharbandora, known as ‘Aunty’, foresters have said.
“Poachers got strong support from a landowner at Petkem, referred to as ‘Aunty’, who allowed her under-construction premises to be used for slaughter. The place is surrounded by bushy vegetation and therefore hidden from the public,” said deputy conservator of forests, North Goa division, Jiss Varkey.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo“There is a link between the gang members from Hubballi, Karnataka, and their relatives staying in Goa.”
Two poachers who were apprehended on Tuesday — Manju Nath, 31, from Usgao, and Basavva Ramesh, 55, from Hubballi — are in police custody and will be produced before the ourt this week.
Meanwhile, Goa forest officials are in touch with Karnataka police to nab one of the absconding accused, a native of Karnataka.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoIt is suspected that wild boar roaming in human habitations in Dharwad and Hubballi area are being trapped using custom-made nets and transported in large numbers to Goa by road. The gang from Hubballi usually reaches Goa in the small hours in their vehicle and slaughters the animals at Petkem, Dharbandora.
Sources in the forest department said that the people involved in the racket make heavy profits. On many occasions, forest officials have received information about the wild meat trade in and around the area. However, the offenders could not be traced “due to the large information network of the gang”.
As for Tuesday’s crackdown, a tip-off was received by the power department from reliable sources. The intel included photographs of the makeshift slaughterhouse and the village road leading to the location. This helped forest officers identify the spot and bust the gang.
The Collem range forest office acted instantly and apprehended the two offenders. As a backup, the mobile squad of the North Goa division of forests positioned itself on the national highway adjacent to the site.
“Our timely action saved the life of 13 wild boar whose legs had been brutally tied up,” an official said.
Three gang members fled the scene, but forest officials managed to identify them. “We will be able to arrest them in a few days. Two of them are from Karnataka including the driver of the Karnataka-registered vehicle which was seized,” Varkey said. “The gang operates 2-3 days a month in this area and returns after the meat is sold.”
Varkey added, “In line with local demand, the gang decides the number of animals to be transported. It is suspected that the gang operates in different parts of the state.
The Karnataka forest department will be approached by Goa forest officials to probe the matter in their jurisdiction. Coordination will be effected by chief wildlife wardens of both the states.
“An FIR has been lodged in this case and an investigation is in progress. Both the arrested offenders were produced before the high court and were sent to custody for two days,” Varkey said. “Our request to the general public is to not consume this illegally traded wild meat as wild boar are listed in Schedule III of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, and even the possession of this wild meat will attract punishment.” Further, these wild animals are illegally transported for long durations and slaughtered in unhygienic conditions, Varkey said.
Poaching noticed in any part of the state may be reported to the control room of the Goa forest department via the toll-free number 1926.