HYDERABAD: It has been more than 18 months since the South Central Railway (SCR) restored MMTS services fully in the city. But its run of poor patronage continues as occupancy is still around 50% less than pre-Covid levels. 

Currently, around 86 MMTS trains are running along with 13 newly launched services between Secunderabad and Medchal. However, majority of these services do not even receive half the patronage that they used to get earlier.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoConsequently, SCR has been forced to repeatedly cancel several MMTS trains every month owing to poor occupancy rates. 
Most recently, on July 15, officials cancelled 22 MMTS trains which include 12 between Lingampally-Hyderabad, five between Umdanagar-Lingampally, four between Lingampally-Falaknuma, and one between Ramachandrapuram-Falaknuma. Officials said that there were multiple reasons for the low occupancy on MMTS trains. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo“Many private companies across various sectors such as IT and real estate are still operating on work-from-home basis or hybrid-mode. Also, additional buses have been put in various routes that are closer to residential places and the Metro has siphoned off a lot of rush,” a senior SCR official said. 
Officials said that they were expecting a V-shaped recovery, but the transport scene witnessed a change in the city after the pandemic when people avoided public transport and preferred own vehicles. 
However, regular commuters still dependent on MMTS service rued that mass cancellations have reduced the frequency of MMTS trains, resulting in unnecessary delays for them during travel. 
“This particularly affects people living in suburban areas where there is no Metro, proper bus connectivity or even access to private cabs. The SCR needs to take measures to increase patronage,” Priscilla D’souza, a techie who commutes regularly on the Hyderabad-Lingampalli route, told TOI. 
Raj Kumar Singh, an RTI activist and a resident of Begumpet, said that proximity of metro stations have changed travelling choices.
“Metro stations being nearer to our homes are more convenient compared to MMTS trains. Also, during summers, people wouldn’t mind the air conditioning that metro and AC buses have to offer. We all can gauge what people prefer,” Singh said. 
Officials said that they have left no stone unturned to increase patronage and even reduced ticket prices.“MMTS continues to remain as the cheapest mode of public transport in the entire city. On top of that, we even reduced first-class ticket prices by 50% for single-journey passengers from May 5, 2022. However, when we conducted awareness campaigns, we realised that the requirement itself has dropped,” the official added.