HYDERABAD: The exit of four-time MLA from Sanathnagar constituency Marri Shashidhar Reddy from Congress is a major boost to BJP in the state capital at the cost of the grand old party.
While Congress is continuing to lose its prominent and first-rung leaders in the city, BJP and TRS have been benefiting by poaching them. Congress' hopes of revival in the twin cities are only declining.

As on date, Congress has only three corporators from GHMC area and not one MLA from the 24 assembly constituencies in Greater Hyderabad.Top Picks For YouTelangana: Marri Shashidhar Reddy resigns from Congress, calls it a failed oppositionCongress leader Marri Shashidhar Reddy into BJP fold, vows to oust TRS from TelanganaHyderabad Lok Sabha constituency is represented by AIMIM president Asaduddin Owaisi, Secunderabad parliamentary constituency by Union minister G Kishan Reddy.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More
The only consolation to Congress is that the Malkajgiri Lok Sabha seat is represented by its state president A Revanth Reddy.
Former HUDA chairman D Sudheer Reddy won from LB Nagar and former home minister Sabitha Indra Reddy from Maheshwaram Assembly constituencies respectively on Congress tickets in the 2018 elections, however, they shifted their loyalties to TRS along with 10 other party legislators to merge CLP into TRSLP in June 2019.
Congress has been losing ground in Greater Hyderabad with other prominent leaders like former MLA M Bikshapathi Yadav from the Serilingampally constituency who also quit Congress and joined BJP before the GHMC elections in 2020.

Former mayor Banda Kartika Reddy, who was denied the Secunderabad assembly ticket in 2018 polls, too joined BJP. AICC spokesperson Dasoju Sravan, who unsuccessfully contested from Khairatabad in 2018, too quit Congress, first to join BJP and within days, joining TRS. The most recent exit of Marri Shashidhar Reddy only exposed that even leaders are losing confidence over the ability of the party to win elections.
Though Congress too got P Vijaya Reddy, daughter of P Janardhan Reddy, from Khairatabad constituency as she quit TRS to join Congress, political analysts said it is both BJP and TRS who have gained significantly on political front in Greater Hyderabad at the cost of the grand old party's decline.
The problem for Congress in the city is that in many constituencies like Sanathnagar, party veterans did not allow the second-rung leadership to grow. And the challenge before Congress is to stop further exodus from the party.
Congress Greater Hyderabad unit former president and ex-MP from Secunderabad Anjan Kumar Yadav told TOI that not in all cases but in some cases like that of Marri Shashidhar Reddy, the party and cadres were only happy that he left.
"Leaders like Shashidhar Reddy did no good for the growth of the party," he said.