As far as egg recipes go, Cilbir or Turkish poached eggs are not the first choice for those in a hurry. But this insta-worthy Mediterranean dish that combines only three basic elements – eggs, butter/olive oil and yogurt – is winning over foodies who like the visual drama and the flavours that this dish packs in. Cilbir (pronounced chill-bir) is basically poached eggs on a bed of creamy, garlicky yogurt, with a generous drizzle of herbed and chilli butter (or olive oil), served cold or at room temperature, mopped up with crusty bread or pita.

Why does Cilbir get the foodie vote?
 Chef Sanjeev Kapoor put up a video demonstrating how surprisingly easy it is to put together Cilbir – a hit with food-grammars from Germany to Chile, Pakistan to India, while brunch menus at trendy cafes have their versions of this exotic dish.Decoding the appeal of Cilbir, Chef-restaurateur Urvika Kanoi says, “The flavours are very comfortable for the Indian palate – nothing too adventurous and yet very tasty.” Food stylists and photographers Madhushree and Anindya Sundar Basu were inundated with comments after they put out their video of making Cilbir. For Madhushree, “The USP is butter sauce – rich and indulgent, especially when you dip the toast in the yolk, mix it all up with the sauce and the lush garlic yoghurt.” 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo Agrees Mumbai-based chef Rahul Karve. “The garlicky yoghurt finished with warm butter and a runny egg yolk creates a melange of flavours by balancing the raw identity of the individual ingredients,” he says about the dish he serves only to his discerning clients.

The first-timer’s guide to acing the Cilbir
 Whisk ¾ cup Greek yoghurt with sea salt and 2 crushed garlic cloves. 
 Melt 2 tbsp butter on low heat and add a little bit of red chilli powder and cumin powder, 1 tsp of olive oil and take it off the heat. 
 Divide the yogurt in two serving plates, spread it and make a well in the centre for the egg to sit.
 Crack a fridge-cold egg in a shallow bowl and squeeze in a bit of lemon juice or vinegar to it. 
 Slide the egg in a saucepan that has boiling water but lowered down as the egg is being placed. On low heat, let the egg set. Gently take it out of the water and place on the yoghurt. 
 Pour a little bit of butter sauce over it and garnish with dill or coriander leaves. Repeat with the other egg. Serve with crusty bread.

Do it your way:
You can substitute aleppo chili oil with a Chinese chili crisp 
Add a pinch of cumin & garlic salt to the butter
Poaching the eggs correctly is not difficult – just get the temperature right. Can substitute vinegar for a dash of lime to the poaching water to avoid the egg whites turning stringy. 
Add basil pesto and cashew miso in the yoghurt for the umami taste.
Cilbir works best with dill leaves, but you can substitute with fresh cilantro as well