Haveri: It is often pointed out by experts and environmentalists that the success of conservation initiatives hinges on the cooperation of the local populace. The success of the residents of Guddada Madapura in Haveri district, who restored to the Karadi Kolla Reserve Forest its lost verdant sheen, attests to the truth of the experts’ opinion.
At the turn of the new century, the forest was a favourite haunt for poachers, and smugglers who robbed the jungle of its precious teak and sandalwood trees. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
The miscreants’ lack of respect for the habitat also meant that they were careless with inflammable materials, igniting many a fire that consumed the forest with fury. In the early years of the new millennium, the reserve forest resembled a dusty brown carpet, mottled by sporadic patches of green. 
The locals, intent on preserving the woods, came together to form the Village Forestry Committee (VFC) in 2000, each of them committed to protecting Karadi Kolla from the threat of criminals. They were assisted in their endeavour by the forest department, which supplied each household in the village with LPG cylinders, thereby eliminating the need for them to use firewood from the jungle. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoOn the other hand, the villagers decided to don the role of guards, preventing smugglers and poachers from intruding the forest. A fence was soon erected around the forest, and the jungle’s valuable resources – hundreds of sandalwood, teakwood trees – are now safe.
Chairman of Shiddeshwara VFC in Guddada Madapura, Karibasappa Kaginelli told TOI that response to the group’s entreaties to locals to take a more proactive role in protecting the forest was initially lukewarm. 
“But gradually, they started attending meetings convened by the forest department, helped build water tanks for the animals, even assisted foresters in documenting the flora and fauna of Karadi Kolla. Once LPG cylinders were distributed, nearly all residents stopped venturing inside the forest for firewood. We also imposed a penalty on those chopping wood inside the forest. But the most difficult task was to discourage villagers from bringing down large trees, besides staving off encroachment and mining,” Karibasappa said.
Executive director of Vanasiri Rural Development Society (VRDS), Ranebennur, SD Baligar, whose organisation helped the villagers constitute the VFC, said that Karibasappa was so invested in protecting the forest that he is being seen as a nightmare for smugglers and poachers. 
“He received support from the other villages, all of whom are now committed to protecting the forest. We named the VFC after the Siddheshwar temple in the village. The fines imposed on people chopping trees and other violations is used for the development of the forest,” Baligar said.
Fellow resident of Guddada Madapura Siddappa Dandina said that logs of wood felled in the forest would fill 20 bullock carts before 2000. “But VRDS personnel educated the villagers about the need to conserve the forest. We are now well-trained in extinguishing forest fires, and assist the forest department personnel in their tasks. Increase in the groundwater reserves has resulted in mahogany, gooseberry, cotton and other trees growing in large numbers in the forest,” he said.