Kolkata, a city famous for its bhanrer cha, has witnessed a spurt in the number of cafes in the past few years, and, in turn, a rise in the number of coffee drinkers. But now, owing to a steady rise in coffee prices in the recent past, city cafes are grappling with increased costs. Though most of them haven’t hiked coffee menu prices yet, will they be doing so anytime soon?
‘NO PLANS TO HIKE MENU PRICES TILL OCTOBER’
The café owners we spoke to don’t plan to pass the cost difference to their customers right now.PollDo you believe in the concept of karma?NoYes“Coffee prices have risen by around 20% to 25% recently. But we are absorbing it for now and not hiking menu prices. I source coffee from a single vendor in Chikmagalur for all my three cafes and they have hiked prices owing to high demand,” said Nikhil Chawla, owner of Marbella’s and Poach- Kitchen Espresso, adding that his three cafes need around 150 kilos of coffee beans every month. “We’ll have to take a call on hiking menu prices if this trend continues till October, but not before that,” he added.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoSatyaki Manna, managing partner of Milee Droog Coffee & Bistro, which uses 50-60 kilos of coffee beans every month, added, “The price rise has not affected us yet because we’re still operating on the prices fixed earlier. But in case there’s a revision, we’ll have to procure it at current rates. But we still plan to absorb the cost and not pass it on to customers.”
To this, Nikhil added, “Given the kind of thriving coffee culture in Kolkata, we want to stay competitive with pricing. Anyway, we see the coffee price hike as a temporary phase.”
Vikas Chowdhary, owner of The Country House, said, “We’ve negotiated with our vendor, and have settled at a 10% price hike. But we don’t plan to pass it on to patrons.”

CAFES INNOVATE TO CUT COSTS
Most cafes are resorting to innovative ways to cut costs. Grant Walsh, the owner of 8th Day Café and Bakery, told us that they only use Arabica beans to ensure quality coffee. “Prices of green beans have gone up globally. Farmers don’t know what to expect, and when to expect due to climate change. Prices have risen by 30-35% since 2020 and keep fluctuating. We source coffee from the plantations in Coorg and to cut costs, we’ve been roasting the beans on our own rather than getting it outsourced. This is helping us save on costs, and also serve premium coffee to our patrons,” he said, adding that the café uses around 160 kilos of coffee beans every month.
FACTOR CONTRIBUTING TO THE PRICE RISE
Inclement weather in India’s coffee growing regions in December and January was a major reason behind the price hike. “According to our vendors, the coffee growing regions like Odisha, Karnataka and Kerala received incessant rain in December and January. This drastically affected production, forcing them to increase prices,” Satyaki told us. According to Vikas, the price rise is happening at a global level and multiple reasons are to blame for this. “Besides the weather, our vendor says that supply of coffee from Brazil has been erratic, which, in turn, has led to incre-ased pressure on Indian plantations,” he said.
Highlights
• Coffee bean prices have risen by 30-35% since 2020
• Price for Arabica has increased from Rs1,200/kg to Rs1,500/kg and for Robusta Rs800/kg to Rs1,000/kg
• There has been a 15 to 20% rise in the price of coffee in India this year