HYDERABAD: Telangana's former CM K Chandrasekhar Rao allegedly wanted to use the 2022 MLA poaching case to force BJP to arrive at a compromise and, in turn, bail out his daughter and MLC K Kavitha in the Delhi liquor scam case. 
This is mentioned in the confession report of Radha Kishan Rao, former DCP of Hyderabad police's task force who is an accused in the illegal phone tapping case. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
The BRS chief and then CM, on getting wind of the alleged poaching bid, ordered a technical surveillance, which led to a failed attempt by police to arrest senior BJP functionary B L Santhosh, according to Rao's confessions. However, KCR's bid to trap BJP came unstuck as the matter reached Telangana HC, which transferred the case to CBI.
Referring to KCR as "peddayana" (elder), Rao said in his confession that the then CM was upset the plan did not work out. "Peddayana was angry for not completing the 'work' as per his expectation. I will not disclose further details as I owe a lot to Peddayana who had re-appointed me twice and posted me in the city task force after my retirement in 2020," he said. Rao disclosed that in Oct last year, then Special Intelligence Bureau (SIB) chief T Prabhakar Rao told him that KCR was informed by then Tandur MLA Pilot Rohith Reddy that some persons claiming to be influential in BJP were in touch with him (Rohith Reddy) and were trying to convince him to join the saffron party after leaving BRS along with some other MLAs. At KCR's behest, SIB's (former) deputy SP D Praneeth Rao intercepted the phones of some private persons and the MLA, and submitted an audio clip, Rao revealed. The former CM then ordered police to lay a trap and told Rohith to cooperate with the cops. He allegedly asked three more MLAs to be part of the operation.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoThe Tandur MLA (Rohith Reddy) enticed three persons to come to a farmhouse in Moinabad, the ex-DCP said. The trio was arrested for luring four BRS MLAs to join BJP. "Later, an SIT was formed and KCR wanted to arrest BJP national leader Santhosh to make the case strong, so that BJP would agree to a compromise, and it could be used to get rid of the ED case against his daughter Kavitha," the confession report alleged. 
However, due to the inefficiency of some officials in Cyberabad police, a key person escaped from police custody, it added.
A team of cops, led by SP-rank officer Rema Rajeshwari, took a chartered flight to Kerala, but failed to nab the wanted person, Rao mentioned. The poaching case later reached the Telangana high court, which stayed the arrest of the accused and handed over the probe to CBI in Dec 2022.