NEW DELHI: Delhi's Rouse Avenue Court on Tuesday summoned AAP leader Atishi to appear before it on June 29 in relation to a defamation case filed by Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) spokesperson Praveen Shankar Kapoor.
The court's order mandates that Atishi must appear before it to address the allegations made in the defamation case, claiming that she had made false allegations of BJP trying to poach AAP MLAs.In a press conference on April 2, Atishi said, “I was told to either join the BJP to save and extend my political career or I would be arrested by the ED within a month.” 
She had also claimed that she and three other senior AAP functionaries could be arrested soon, and claimed that she was advised to join the BJP or risk being arrested by the ED in a month.
Responding to the court summons Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal said this is "complete dictatorship."
"I had said earlier that they will arrest Atishi next. They are planning to do so now. Complete dictatorship. In completely flimsy, frivolous and false cases, they are arresting ALL leaders of AAP one by one. Every single opposition leader will be arrested if Modi ji comes back to power. AAP is not imp. Saving our dear country from dictatorship is imp." Kejriwal wrote on X.

In response to the case filed against her by BJP Spokesperson Kapoor, Delhi minister Atishi said, "I want to ask the BJP how they formed the government in Goa, Manipur, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh and Arunachal Pradesh. How do the MLAs reach the BJP from different parties? The BJP has to answer this. How does it happen that the NCP is split into two halves and all of their leaders come to the BJP, and all their CBI/ED cases are closed? When Chaggan Bhujbal comes to the BJP from NCP, then why do the CBI and ED file closure reports?"
"When Praful Patel comes to the BJP then all matters of the Air India scam are closed. When Ajit Pawar comes to the BJP, then all cases in the EOW, against his wife and nephew, are closed. Operation Lotus of the BJP is out in the open... The BJP must answer how they are forming a government without getting the majority in the elections," she added.
On April 3, Kapoor had sent a legal notice to Atishi.
 BJP had demanded a public apology for claiming that the party had approached her through a “very close” person, asking her to switch sides.
The complaint has been filed before the court of additional chief metropolitan magistrate Tanya Bamniyal and was scheduled for pre-summoning evidence on May 4.