Mandya: Even as the election for Mandya Milk Union (MANMUL) president is scheduled for Thursday, both JD(S) and BJP have shifted a total of eight directors affiliated with them to resorts in an attempt to stall poaching.
Roopa, one of two BJP-supported directors, is staying in Mandya. It is believed that former Nagamangala MLA Suresh Gowda had been spearheading a master plan to stall the district minister N Cheluvarayaswamy’s attempts to poach the directors to support Congress.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
JD(S) leader and former chief minister HD Kumaraswamy is said to have taken the MANMUL president’s election as a prestige issue and said to have handed over the responsibility to Suresh Gowda to ensure that the JD(S) continued to have its hold on MANMUL. All eight directors are expected to arrive in Mandya tomorrow to take part in the election process.
Speaking to TOI, Mandya district JD(S) president Ramesh rubbished the claims of directors being shifted to a resort and added that all seven directors affiliated to the party were in Mandya and would participate in the election scheduled on Thursday.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoWhen asked if the BJP would extend its support to the JD(S) party, Ramesh said that the JD(S) had requested them for support and the BJP was yet to revert.
Among the total of 12 elected directors, the ruling Congress has three directors, JD(S) has seven and the BJP has two directors. Meanwhile, the state government is yet to appoint a nominated director in place of Sujatha Krishna, who was nominated by the previous BJP government, to MANMUL. 
The government is expected to appoint the director on Wednesday. This apart, three government officials, a deputy director of animal husbandry, a deputy registrar of co-operative societies and a KMF representative will also cast their franchise in electing the MANMUL president.
Having elected three directors, a nominated director and the votes of three government officials, the total strength of the Congress will be seven. However, with JD(S) and BJP coming together the majority will be in favour of the coalition with a total of 9 votes.
Congress trying to postpone election
Meanwhile, Congress is trying to postpone the election. The party delegation met Mandya SP and submitted a memorandum with a request to stall the election process. 
Mandya district Congress president Gangadhar told TOI that no such attempts to supersede MANMUL were being made but mentioned that Congress had requested the authorities to postpone the election citing possible law and order situations. “We have also urged authorities to postpone the election till an investigation was conducted into the alleged adulteration and recruitment scam reported in MANMUL. We want people involved in the scam to be brought to justice,” he added.