RANCHI: Not just the three Congress MLAs — Irfan Ansari, Naman Bixal Kongari and Rajesh Kachchap — who were arrested by Howrah police in July for allegedly trying to topple the Hemant Soren government, the grand old party has many more MLAs who are “vulnerable to poaching”, party insiders said on Friday.
The state party leadership is constantly keeping tabs on them through various means to stop any attempts of “going out of range” amid the emerging political crisis in the state, they said.
A senior Congress leader said on anonymity, “Taking a cue from the Maharashtra coup with many Sena MLAs finding their way to Assam, we are extra alert this time.”
He further said, “The general feeling within the party is that barring from four ministers of Congress, a majority of the remaining MLAs, at least 10, are prone to a cross-over anytime mostly because they are unhappy with the state of affairs in the government and within the party coupled with their own high ambitions for a long time.”
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoHe added, “We are regularly keeping in touch with our MLAs through various means — both direct and indirect methods — to ensure that they are within our reach.”
Currently, Congress has 18 MLAs, including Pradeep Yadav, who represents the Poriyahat constituency. Yadav, who had won on a ticket of the now defunct JVM-P, was inducted into the party and is still to be formally vetted by the assembly speaker. Of the total MLAs, four — Rameshwar Oraon (Lohardaga/finance), Badal Patralekh(Jarmundi/agriculture), Banna Gupta (Jamshedpur West/health) and Alamgir Alam (Pakur/rural development & parliamentary affairs) — are ministers.
Another party insider claimed that the recent episode of Bermo MLA Kumar Jaimangal lodging an FIR against three of the Congress MLAs after their arrest in West Bengal has further rattled everyone. 
State party president Rajesh Thakur, however, reiterated that all their flocks are intact.