Nagpur: In a new twist to the tiger poaching cases at Gadchiroli and Chandrapur, Bawaria poachers’ mastermind, 81-year-old Mishram Raghunath Jakhar has reported sick, allegedly to avoid arrest.
Jakhar was arrested on July 31 by a joint team of Maharashtra forest department and Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB) from his residence at Dwarka, New Delhi.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoJakhar was produced before a metropolitan magistrate, who granted transit bail to him and directed him to remain present at Gadchiroli court by August 3.

However, instead of reaching Gadchiroli, Jakhar filed a bail application through his lawyer PC Sammaddkar before the district and sessions judge UM Mudholkar. The application was reserved for an order on August 5.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoA retired employee of Delhi forest department, Jakhar is the alleged mastermind of tiger poachers and has directed generations of poachers. He used to extract money from the Bawaria gangs by blackmailing them to either pay ransom to him, or he would entrap them by intimating WCCB officials about poaching cases.
Jakhar’s links were traced to the Gadchiroli tiger poaching cases when it came to light he had extracted Rs30,000 from arrested poachers Mayadevi and Rajusingh. The money was transferred via e-payment to the kin of Jakhar. It is not clear whether Jakhar got the hint that his bail application would be rejected and he would be arrested.
Meanwhile, the WCCB has constituted a six-member Special Investigating Team (SIT) under deputy director Rudolf Alvares to take over the poaching case in which a tiger skin and 19kg bones were seized on June 26 from five poachers.
Instead of supporting the Maharashtra forest department, the WCCB seems to be conducting a parallel investigation into the matter. The SIT shall probe forward and backward linkages in collaboration with the relevant enforcement authorities and agencies at the pan-India level.
On February 21, a tiger was poached in the Nilgiris in Tamil Nadu by a Bawaria gang from Punjab. The gang was arrested while dealing with the skin and tiger body parts. 
“The Nilgiris case had forward and backward links to Gadchiroli. If WCCB had acted in time, several tigers could have been saved from being hunted,” said forest officials.
On August 2, S Venugopal, counsel for the forest department, had sought a production warrant of five poaching case accused lodged presently in Guwahati jail.
CP Raghuvanshi, JMFC, Gadchiroli, has requested the judicial magistrate at Guwahati to give NOC to the production warrant. 
“A forest team is already in Assam to bring the accused to Maharashtra,” sources said.