CHENNAI: The demand for bush meat, triggered by the Covid-triggered closure of regular meat shops, has led to an increase in incidents of poachers using arms against wildlife outside forest areas in the state, say wildlife officials.
Black-napped hares, wild boar, spotted deer, monitor lizard and mongoose, found in good numbers outside protected areas, are among the easy targets for poachers, said Coimbatore district forest officer A Venkatesh.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
At least seven poaching cases were filed recently in the division against people hunting wildlife using arms, he said. “We also seized country made bombs, or Avuttu Kaai, used for killing smaller mammals such as wild boar.”
At Hosur in Krishnagiri district, forest officials probing the poaching of a tusker found a few residents in some villages in possession of illegal weapons with ammunition.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoHosur wildlife warden S Prabhu said an accused in the elephant poaching case told officials that many villagers had weapons in their homes. The heads of villages was then warned of action. “Within a month, villagers surrendered 29 weapons with ammunition,” he said.
At Perambalur, Orathanadu in Thanjavur district, Rasipuram in Namakkal district and Madurai, where the forest cover is relatively less, small mammals roam freely after dark and are regularly poached, said a senior wildlife official.
Illegal weapons, a majority of them country-made, seized by forest department officials are handed over to the jurisdictional police for further investigation, said the official.
Whenever there is adequate evidence, a senior police officer said, cases are registered against those holding weapons without licence, invoking the relevant provisions of the Indian Arms Act, 1959, and the Indian Explosives Act of 1884. When a case is registered under the arms and explosive act, the offence will become cognizable and non-bailable, said the official.
In some cases, the Q branch police are tipped off about illegal weapons and pass on the information to the district police officers concerned for further investigation, said the official.