NEW DELHI: Amid the ongoing political crisis in Jharkhand, the ruling JMM-Congress government had on Saturday shifted UPA MLAs to Khunti district of the state in order to avoid poaching attempts by the BJP. The MLAs, along with chief minister Hemant Soren, returned to Ranchi after spending a few hours at Latratu in the neighbouring district. 
Earlier today, UPA legislators met at the residence of CM Soren, who is facing the threat of being disqualified an an MLA in the state assembly for allegedly violating poll norms by extending himself a mining lease.Soon after three buses carrying MLAs of the Jharkhand Mukti Morcha (JMM)-led ruling alliance left from Ranchi. 
Here are the top developments:
Congress Legislature Party meet
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreA meeting of the Congress Legislature Party was held on Saturday evening to chalk out a strategy for further action to save the coalition government in Jharkhand. The meeting was presided over by Congress general secretary in-charge Avinash Pande after the MLAs returned from Latratu Dam in Jharkhand's Khunti.
"No idea where will we go tomorrow. But we are ready to do anything at the call of high command to save the government," Congress MLA Shilpi Neha Tirkey said.
Congress Legislative Party meeting held after the MLAs returned to Ranchi from Khunti district. (ANI photo)
The Congress has blamed the BJP for polluting politics in the state. "Jharkhand's politics is different ... BJP is trying to pollute politics here. If EC sends a report in a sealed envelope, it gets leaked even before it's opened. The alliance government's recent decisions will affect their (BJP) base in tribal areas," Jharkhand Congress working president Bandhu Tirkey said.
Soren's disqualification order
Sources in the governor's official residence had on August 25 claimed that the ECI has recommended Soren's disqualification as an MLA for violating electoral norms by extending a mining lease to himself, but there has been no official confirmation yet.
While reports suggested earlier on Saturday that Jharkhand governor Ramesh Bais will send the order of disqualification of Hemant Soren as an MLA to the Election Commission of India (ECI) by evening, it is unlikely now. According to a source at the Raj Bhavan, nothing is going to happen before Monday (August 29). 
The BJP, the petitioner in the case, has sought Soren's disqualification for violating Section 9 (A) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, which deals with disqualification for government contracts.
'Resort politics' need of the hour
A Congress source had earlier said that all arrangements have been made to park the coalition legislators in either Chhattisgarh or West Bengal. "All ruling MLAs will be sent to a single destination if the need arises," another added.
According to a source in JMM, the option to take the legislators out of Jharkhand was open and all preparations have been made.
In the rapidly changing political scenario, 'resort politics' is the need of the hour to keep the numbers of the ruling alliance intact, party sources asserted.
'Picnic' at resort in Khunti district
Jharkhand rural development and parliamentary affairs minister Alamgir Alam claimed the MLAs were going for a 'picnic at Moments Resort in Latratu in neighbouring Khunti district'.
Congress legislator Deepika Pandey Singh said it was a "break for refreshment". Another MLA, Shilpi Neha Tirkey, said, "We will follow the directions of the party."
Jharkhand CM Hemant Soren is seen taking a boat ride near Latratu dam in Khunti district along with JMM & Congress MLAs. (ANI photo)
Incidently, Alam said on Friday that the MLAs of the ruling alliance cannot be poached and will stay in Ranchi.
Third meeting of ruling party MLAs
Hemant Soren called for a meeting of the JMM-led ruling alliance legislators on Saturday morning, a day after he met the MLAs twice at his official residence in Ranchi. 
On Friday, MLAs of the ruling coalition assured Soren of their support. Congress leader and Jharkhand health minister Banna Gupta said that the JMM-Congress coalition is "standing strong".
State Congress to support JMM decision
Jharkhand Congress working president Bandhu Tirkey on Friday said that the top party leadership instructed him to support whatever decision alliance partner JMM takes following reports that Hemant Soren could be disqualified as an MLA.
"Whatever decision JMM takes as the major party of the alliance, Congress will support it. The top leadership of Congress has instructed us for the same," Tirkey said.
He alleged that the BJP always "insults the mandate and tried to destablise the JMM-Congress coalition government" in Jharkhand.
In the 81-member Jharkhand assembly, the ruling alliance has 30 MLAs of the JMM, 18 MLAs of the Congress and one MLA of the Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD).
-With agency inputs