Nagpur: Even as the dust in the poaching of several tigers in Gadchiroli and Chandrapur is yet to settle, a steel trap used to kill big carnivores was seized in Shahapur (Karad) in the Sahyadri Tiger Reserve (STR) landscape in Western Maharashtra.
The steel trap is similar to the seven traps that were seized from over a dozen Bawaria poachers arrested from Gadchiroli recently.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe Baheliya poachers from Katni in Madhya Pradesh and Bawarias from Haryana and Punjab use these traps to kill tigers and leopards. 

The incident came to light when a local resident Yogesh Shingan saw a dog dragging a steel trap stuck in its leg. The domestic animal was owned by a farmer, Dhanaji Patil.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoShingan and Patil immediately removed the trap from the dog’s leg. Shingan informed Satara district honorary wildlife warden Rohan Bhate. 
Bhate said, “It looks to be a leopard trap used by the Katni gangs. The trap must have been laid on the hills near Sahyadri sugar factory.” 
“This is the third incident in little over a year when such a trap has been found. I have apprised the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB), Mumbai, of the incident.” 
Though there are no tigers left in STR as per the latest 2022 tiger estimation by the NTCA-WII, poachers seem to be targeting leopards here. Similar traps were recovered from parts of Vidarbha last year.
Wildlife conservationists said, “Some people in the region make these traps. It is possible that Baheliya poachers may be using local poachers as sleeper cells to kill big cats. These traps are used only by the Baheliyas. People manufacturing such traps are also active in Western Maharashtra. Regular seizure of these traps indicates poaching is going on right under the nose of the forest department.”
Satara assistant conservator of forest Mahesh Zanjurne said, “Such traps are also laid to kill wild boars and herbivores for bush meat. We are investigating local and other linkages. We are yet to ascertain whether the Bawaria or Bahelia gangs were involved.”