Udhagamandalam: Three days after an Indian gaur was found shot dead in the O’Valley range in the Gudalur division of forests in the Nilgiris, the forest department is still looking for the culprits who killed the animal. It is still not known when the 10-year-old male gaur was shot dead. It was found dead with injuries in a private coffee estate in O’Valley on Thursday.
Postmortem report revealed that the gaur had been shot at least twice with a shotgun and several pieces of pellets were found inside the carcass during postmortem, forest department officials said.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
According to O’Valley forest range officer, Suresh, the locals on January 22 informed the forest officials that a gaur had been roaming in O’Valley and it seemed so weak that it could barely walk. Late evening on January 24, the forest department field staff found the animal grazing near a river.
“We planned to provide the gaur with medical treatment on the following day. However, on January 25, the field staff found it dead in a private coffee estate”, said Suresh, adding, “Only during the postmortem, we came to know that the gaur was shot twice”.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndo“The gaur might have been shot at least three days before it was found roaming in the O’Valley area by the locals. We have registered a case under the Wildlife Protection Act 1972 and investigation is underway. We will nab the culprits soon,” said Suresh.
On October 29, last year, a gaur was found dead with bullet wounds on the side of the road leading to Kateri dam in the Kundha range in the Nilgiris division. Three people from the Gudalur area were arrested in relation to the case in December 2023.
According to sources, in both cases, shotguns were used, and the cartridges were of the same kind.