Case name: The burned body in the forest
Case code: 2023-DE03    
        
            
                
                                            
    
            Facial reconstruction of victim
    
                                            
    
            Aerial photograph of the course of the "Hemecker Weg" road through the wooded area "Bergfeld" in Altena
    
                                            
    
            Tooth jewellery in the form of a diamond-like rhinestone (mass product) with a diameter of approx. 2 mm (on the upper right incisor, tooth 12)
    
                                            
    
            Facial soft tissue reconstruction dated 1998 (further variants of the reconstruction are shown below and might more closely resemble what the unknown woman actually looked like)
    
                                    
                
                    1 /
                    4
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
Date of death (estimated): 1 June 1997Date of discovery:  2 June 1997Location: Germany: Altena forest area, Altena-Bergfeld, Hemecker Weg.Sex: FemaleEstimated year of birth: 1975 - 1979Estimated age: Between 18 and 22 years oldHeight: Petite figure, 153-157 cm and weighing about 45 kgSkin tone: FairHair colour: Red-brown to darkEye colour: DarkClothing: The woman was wearing no clothing when she was found. Blue and grey cotton fibres were found which could have belonged to the woman but it is not sure. The woman’s shoe size was 33-35.Tattoos, birth marks, scars: UnknownJewellery: On one of the upper incisors (tooth 12), a round adhesive surface was found, which had been professionally applied after etching. The victim probably wore a tooth gem in the form of a diamond-like rhinestone (mass-produced article) with a diameter of approx. 2 mm. Traces in the adhesive surface indicate that the stone was most likely removed as part of the crime.The caseOn Monday 2 June 1997, a naked female body was found in a wooded area in Altena-Bergfeld. The victim had been raped, strangled and then set on fire.The place where the body was found is not consistent with the place where the crime was committed so it is believed that the victim was moved from an unknown location.The perpetrator tried hard to eliminate any chance of identification. Checks of the fingerprints taken from the victim were negative.CharacteristicsThe woman probably wore a tooth gem, a diamond-like rhinestone (commercially available mass product) on her right upper incisor (tooth 12). It cannot be ruled out that she wore braces until the age of 12. The victim's toenails were painted red. Contact
If you have any information regarding the possible identity of this person, please contact the German national police via the form below.You can also contact them and view this case on their national police website. 
    
        
            
                                    
                        
                    
                                Identify Me: DE03 - The burned body in the forest
            
            
                    If you have any information regarding the possible identity of this person, please contact the national police.
                                                    
                        
    Contact the German national police