DUBAI, United Arab Emirates – Sharing and developing best practices against counterfeiting and piracy crimes has been the focus of the 8th Regional IP Crime Conference.Bringing together some 480 delegates representing mainly the Middle East and North Africa region, INTERPOL, the Dubai Police and the Emirates IP Association (EIPA) co-hosted  the two-day (8 to 9 December) event.With the global aspects of transnational organized IP crime high on the agenda, delegates focused on the extensive and complex criminal enterprises involved, as well as the importance of awareness and education in fighting IP crime.        
        
            
                
                                            
    
            Delegates focused on the extensive and complex criminal enterprises involved in IP crime.
    
                                            
    
            Major General Dr Abdel Quduos Alobaidli, Dubai Police Assistant Commander for Excellence and Pioneering, Chairman of the Emirates IP Association.
    
                                            
    
            Dr Abdelrahman Almuaini, General Secretary of the Emirates IP Association.
    
                                            
    
            Abdulaziz Obaidalla, INTERPOL Head of National Central Bureau coordination for the MENA region.
    
                                            
    
            Rory Corcoran, Senior Coordinator, Illicit Markets INTERPOL sub-directorate.
    
                                            
    
            The importance of awareness and education was also focus of the 8th Regional IP Crime Conference.
    
                                    
                
                    1 /
                    6
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
“IP crime generates huge profits and organized criminal groups are constantly seeking new opportunities to distribute their illicit products. This conference has highlighted the important need for law enforcement and other stakeholders to collaborate and innovate in response,” said H.E Lieutenant General Dhahi Khalfan Tamim, Deputy Chairman of Police and General Security in Dubai.In this respect, participants underlined the role for innovation and cooperation through cross-sector partnerships as two necessary components for winning the battle against counterfeits.    
    
        “We must focus on the fact that making money is a key incentive for criminals involved in IP crime.”
            
“We must focus on the fact that making money is a key incentive for criminals involved in IP crime,” said Daoming Zhang, INTERPOL Assistant Director, Organized and Emerging Crime.“INTERPOL works with its member countries to increase the risk of prosecution and seize the assets of criminals. Intelligence is vital to all our activities and we strongly encourage police and partners to share their data systematically with INTERPOL,” added Mr Zhang.INTERPOL and EIPA held workshops during the conference to allow law enforcement and industry experts to share the latest IP crime trends and enforcement challenges, as well as best practices for raising awareness amongst civil society on the dangers posed by counterfeit and pirated goods.