LYON, France – The INTERPOL Global Academy recently welcomed two new members to its network of trusted education institutions supporting police learning around the world.On 14 January 2022, the Austrian Federal Police Academy became the seventh member of INTERPOL’s Global Academy. The Botswana Police Service subsequently became the Academy’s eight member on 9 February 2022.With the addition of these two institutions, the network now has physical representation in every continent, thereby allowing it to provide training support to the respective regions.INTERPOL Executive Director Technology and Innovation, Mr Madan Oberoi signed agreements with Mr. Norbert Leitner, Director of the Austrian Federal Police Academy and Mr. Keabetswe Makgophe, Chief of Police of Botswana.Mr Leitner praised the agreement as key to affirming the Austrian Police Academy’s close relationship with INTERPOL.“We are pleased to join the INTERPOL Global Academy, and look forward to providing specialized training courses for law enforcement personnel in Europe with a focus on cybercrime, digital crime and combating terrorism. With this agreement, the Federal Academy joins INTERPOL in its task of working with the police to make the world a safer place by building capacity to prevent crime,” said Mr Leitner.Joining the INTERPOL Global Academy Network is an important step regarding collaboration in the fight against crime. Added to this are the benefits it provides in the area of training and development for Botswana Police Service and the wider southern African region, Mr Makgophe explained.“Joining the Network will amongst other things, give our Police College relevance and exposure. It will accord us an opportunity to participate in an exclusive platform composed of law enforcement training experts aimed at among others facilitation of discussions on regional crime trends, training needs and finding solutions”.  Mr Makgophe added.Mr Oberoi highlighted the constantly evolving nature of criminal activity and the need for law enforcement to respond and adapt to such changes.
    
        "Training and capacity building are essential facets of INTERPOL’s support to member countries. These new members of the Global Academy Network are an important addition to expand the reach of these efforts."
        Madan Oberoi, INTERPOL Executive Director Technology and Innovation
    
“Our network of 195 member countries means INTERPOL is uniquely placed to inform and educate the officers on the frontlines to help them in this important work,” he added.The INTERPOL Global Academy is a network of trusted law enforcement education institutions, both regional and national in scope. Launched in 2019, the Academy provides a global approach to law enforcement training.Members of the Global Academy support the creation and delivery of select digital and face-to-face training courses, covering INTERPOL’s tools and services, crime areas, and other law enforcement topics.They also help identify and coordinate responses to training needs and contribute to a knowledge exchange platform to advance law enforcement education through cutting-edge training tools and methodologies.The INTERPOL Global Academy currently has eight members: Argentina, Austria, Botswana, Colombia, Korea, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia and Spain.