The General Assembly is INTERPOL's supreme governing body and comprises delegates appointed by the governments of our member countries.It meets once a year and takes all the major decisions affecting general policy, the resources needed for international cooperation, working methods, finances and programmes of activities. These decisions are in the form of resolutions.
    
        
            
INTERPOL’s Centenary2023 marks the 100-year anniversary of the Organization, and this General Assembly is being hosted in Vienna, Austria – in recognition of the fact that this is the city where INTERPOL was created in 1923.Bringing together chiefs of police and senior officials from around the world, the event will also round off a year of celebrations for our member countries, that have included taking the INTERPOL flag to landmark destinations such as the summit of Mount Everest.During the four-day conference that runs from 28 November to 1 December, senior police officials from around the world will address current and emerging threats, including the significant growth of transnational organized crime.    
        
            
                
                                            
    
            INTERPOL has returned to Vienna for the centenary police conference.
    
                                            
    
            The 91st General Assembly is focusing on bridging INTERPOL’s past and future.
    
                                            
    
            INTERPOL’s General Assembly is taking place in Vienna, a century after the organization was founded in the Austrian capital.
    
                                            
    
            More than 1,000 police and law enforcement leaders from over 160 countries are participating in this year’s General Assembly.
    
                                            
    
            International cooperation is vital to fight against crime which today knows no border, said Karl Nehammer, Federal Chancellor of the Republic of Austria.
    
                                            
    
            Franz Ruf, Director General for Public Security, Republic of Austria.
    
                                            
    
            “No country or region should be left behind in the fight against crime,” said INTERPOL President Ahmed Naser al-Raisi.
    
                                            
    
            The 2023 General Assembly has brought together law enforcement leaders from the organization’s 196 member countries.
    
                                            
    
            Delegates are set to discuss ways to leverage technology and new cooperation mechanisms at the 91st General Assembly.
    
                                            
    
            The 2023 General brought together law enforcement leaders from the organization’s 196 member countries.
    
                                    
                
                    1 /
                    10
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
AgendaThis session of the General Assembly will include panels and presentations on the following themes:Member country activities to promote a century of learning, collaboration and innovation.Emerging trends, operational impact and preparedness for the future.Police cooperation and discussions on the use of emerging technologies by law enforcement.A review of critical global crime threats facing policing today, including transnational organized crime, environmental crime and preventing the circulation of child sexual abuse materialA global dialogue among regional policing organizations to enhance and maintain strategic and operational coordination.Strengthening frameworks for cooperation such as governance and rules on the processing of data.Approving budget and activities for 2024Operational and strategic partnerships with governmental, non-governmental and UN partnersThe next generation – recruiting and retaining talent and diversity at the General Secretariat.