Timeframe: 2022 - 2023
Budget: EUR 418,950
Donor:  European UnionThe situationIllegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing remains one of the greatest threats to marine ecosystems, according to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). Such activity can seriously undermine national and regional efforts to manage fisheries sustainably as well as endeavors to conserve marine biodiversity.IUU fishing occurs in high seas, exclusive, economic zone (EEZ) and within territorial waters. The exploitation of this sector affects the development, peace and security of countries across the globe. International law enforcement cooperation is vital given the transnational nature of these violations.Since 2014, INTERPOL has provided investigative and operational support to national authorities in all 196 member countries. Such support has helped law enforcement officers identify transnational criminal syndicates and tackle fisheries offences, including IUU fishing. INTERPOL has also helped member countries build capacity and resources for effective monitoring, control, and surveillance (MCS).
    
        
                    © European Union
            
Project aimsProject ALIOS will facilitate international cooperation towards sustainable ocean management, focusing on the three following objectives:Promoting international cooperation in the fight against IUU fishing;Strengthening the ability of INTERPOL member countries to address IUU fishing, management of fisheries resources and crimes occurring in the fisheries sector;Strengthening cooperation between INTERPOL and the European Commission Directorate-General for Maritime Affairs and Fisheries (DG MARE).Project activitiesUnder this project, INTERPOL will carry out a range of activities such as:Providing investigative and analytical support to law enforcement agencies. This includes drafting and disseminating criminal intelligence analysis reports;   National-level operational investigative support, with the deployment of INTERPOL officers in country upon request;Organizing Regional Investigative and Analytical Case Meetings (RIACMs);Capacity building on enforcement against IUU fishing, including the use of shipborne information in support of  investigations.Project ALIOS is funded by the European Union. Views and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or CINEA Agency. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them.