ASHGABAT, Turkmenistan – Boosting border security in Turkmenistan and countries in the region by developing their ability to detect and investigate counterfeit travel document crime was the focus of an INTERPOL course.The training looked to strengthen the region’s ability to detect criminals and terrorists at border control.            
    
        
                    Participants at the training course came from five INTERPOL member countries: Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, Pakistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.
            
The 7th joint CCSD-Regula Security Document Examination Training course gathered some 20 border control officers, security officials and forensic document examiners.The three-day (11-13 September) security training course, jointly delivered by INTERPOL’s Counterfeit and Security Documents Branch (CCSD) and international digital security company Regula, enabled regional experts to examine new printing methods, the latest document security features, recent document verification technologies and current examination techniques.            
    
        
                    The 7th joint CCSD- Regula Security Document Examination Training course held in Turkmenistan gathered some 20 border control officers, security officials and forensic document examiners from the region.
            
“Turkmenistan welcomes the opportunity to actively promote international and regional cooperation in the fight against organized crime. NCB Ashgabat has been actively using all the resources and tools of INTERPOL to combat international crime,” said Yahshyrat Guyjov, Head of the INTERPOL National Central Bureau in Ashgabat.“Regula and INTERPOL made a great progress in enhancing abilities of law enforcement agencies in the region in the fight against global threads like terrorism, smuggling of migrants and drugs trafficking by boosting their capacity to detect document fraud,” said Andrei Dumski of Regula.A key objective of the training was to develop the knowledge and expertise of participants in recognizing fraudulent documents and increase communication between border and immigration control officers.            
    
        
                    INTERPOL Counterfeit Currency and Documents Coordinator Daniela Djidrovska said the training would help  strengthen the region’s ability to detect criminals and terrorists at border control.
            
“This 7th joint INTERPOL-Regula training course is designed for law enforcement officers to detect fraudulent documents and prevent criminals from using them to commit crimes. Regula training equipment designed for this purpose was put in place and used by trainees to correctly identify security features that are commonly altered or fraudulently manufactured,” said INTERPOL Counterfeit Currency and Documents Coordinator Daniela Djidrovska.Participants at the training course came from five INTERPOL member countries: Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, Pakistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.            
    
        
                    The training looked to develop the knowledge of participants in recognizing fraudulent documents.