OSLO, Norway – INTERPOL is capitalizing on the many benefits of immersive learning to train law enforcement officers around the world on intellectual property (IP) crime investigations.This week, the 450 participants from 70 countries in attendance at the 16th International Law Enforcement IP Crime Conference (26-27 September) will test the Organization’s first immersive learning environments dedicated to IP crime. Through virtual reality headsets, they will experience how both extended reality technologies and the Metaverse can ensure greater engagement and enable hands-on operational exercises in environments which are not easily accessible.Developed by INTERPOL, under the umbrella of the International IP Crime Investigators College (IIPCIC), the immersive learning training sessions take trainees from a virtual INTERPOL classroom to operational locations such as warehouses, crime scenes and crime labs. Officers are guided through the inspection and investigation process, where they can safely pick up counterfeit goods and examine potentially fraudulent documents.    
        
            
                
                                            
    
            Trainees are guided through the inspection and investigation process.
    
                                            
    
            Training courses using extended reality technologies and the Metaverse can ensure greater engagement.
    
                                            
    
            The Organization’s first immersive learning environments dedicated to IP crime is presented to experts.
    
                                    
                
                    1 /
                    3
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
The result is an increased opportunity to apply skills and knowledge, without the complications of physically accessing restricted areas such as Free Trade Zones, or the dangers of handling hazardous goods.In his opening remarks, INTERPOL Secretary General said: “Through the use of immersive learning technology, we aim to turn world-class research into operational capabilities to empower law enforcement agencies, Free Trade Zone personnel and cross-sector stakeholders to be ready to cooperate.“This complements the operational support we bring against global criminal threats around the clock, through the exchange of actionable police information, and operational coordination,” concluded Mr Stock.This year’s theme: pathways to solutionsApplied research and technology is just one of the topics that will be covered by the 2023 International Law Enforcement IP Crime Conference, which is cohosted by INTERPOL and the Norwegian Police Service in partnership with UL Standards & Engagement.Delegates from government, law enforcement, academia, international organizations and industry will also look at the role of women in IP leadership, as well as the ever-increasing environmental risks of transnational organized IP crime.Officials from the INTERPOL General Secretariat will be on hand throughout the event to collaboratively discuss investigations, enforcement activities, initiatives, and ideas to rethink international cooperation and mechanisms.Welcoming delegates, Kristin Kvigne, Director General of Norway’s National Criminal Investigation Service, said: “I would like to thank INTERPOL for giving Norway the opportunity to host this international conference on IP crime. It is also special to host the conference in the same year that INTERPOL celebrates its 100th year anniversary”.    
        
            
                
                                            
    
            INTERPOL Secretary General, Jürgen Stock opened the 16th International Law Enforcement Intellectual Property Crime Conference.
    
                                            
    
            Kristin Kvigne, Director General of Norway’s National Criminal Investigation Service.
    
                                            
    
            Madan Oberoi, INTERPOL Executive Director of Technology and Innovation.
    
                                            
    
            Terrence R Brady, President and CEO, UL Research Institutes, Board Chair, UL Standards and Engagement.
    
                                    
                
                    1 /
                    4