BRATISLAVA, Slovakia – A high-level side event on “Border Security and Counter-Terrorism” was held today on the margins of the OSCE Ministerial Council in Bratislava.  The panel discussion focused on the long-standing cooperation between the OSCE and INTERPOL and was attended by high-level representatives of the two organizations.Participants discussed the current threat spectrum and ways to mitigate risks and combat any challenges faced by members of INTERPOL and OSCE participating States. They also exchanged views on how to counter the ever-evolving nature of transnational threats - such as terrorism, organized crime and human trafficking - by amplifying the strength and effectiveness of their actions, from policy to practice.        
        
            
                
                                            
    
            "INTERPOL is increasingly engaging with its partners to support member countries and create synergies to strengthen global security." - Secretary General Stock
    
                                            
    
            Secretary General Jürgen Stock is greeted by Lukáš Parízek, State Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs of the Slovak Republic
    
                                            
    
            The event was held on the margins of the 26th OSCE Ministerial Council
    
                                            
    
            Secretary General Jürgen Stock meets with Lukáš Parízek, State Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs of the Slovak Republic
    
                                            
    
            26th OSCE Ministerial Council
    
                                            
    
            26th OSCE Ministerial Council
    
                                    
                
                    1 /
                    6
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
“We have identified effective multilateralism as one of the priorities of our Slovak OSCE Chairmanship. This meeting proves our engagement in this area. The OSCE and INTERPOL are natural partners,” stressed Lukáš Parízek, State Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs of the Slovak Republic and Special Representative for the Slovak 2019 OSCE Chairmanship.The threats posed by terrorism-related activities remain a crucial issue for the international community as a whole and for the OSCE region in particular.OSCE Secretary General Thomas Greminger noted that this collaboration to address many transnational threats serves as “a great model to tackle such complex challenges”. “Countering and preventing terrorism is a shared responsibility and requires a comprehensive, cohesive, and internationally coordinated response. We need to utilize all the tools and experience accumulated in both our organizations to muster a cooperative and efficient response to this global threat,” said Greminger.Addressing participants, INTERPOL Secretary General Jürgen Stock said: “INTERPOL is increasingly engaging with its partners to support member countries and create synergies to strengthen global security. This event provides a perfect opportunity for us to showcase how our policing capabilities complement the work of the OSCE.”    
    
        "INTERPOL is increasingly engaging with its partners to support member countries and create synergies to strengthen global security."
        Jürgen Stock, INTERPOL Secretary General
    
INTERPOL and the OSCE adopted a three-year Joint Action Plan in 2017. Key areas for co-operation include: border security, counter-terrorism, forensic and police data management, combating trafficking in human beings, and the smuggling of migrants. The Joint Action plan was preceded by the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding in 2014.