The votes for the Assembly elections in Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, and Telangana will be tallied on Sunday. This is an important event leading up to the Lok Sabha elections next year. The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) swept the Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan assembly elections in the run-up to the Lok Sabha elections 2024. On the other hand, K Chandrashekhar Rao's Bharat Rashtra Samithi (BRS) conceded defeat in the Telangana assembly elections. Telangana Chief Minister and BRS party president K Chandra Sekhar Rao submitted his resignation to Governor Dr. Tamilisai Soundararajan. According to a notification, the Telangana Governor accepted Rao’s resignation letter and further requested him to continue in office till the formation of a new government. BJP is set to form its government in Madhya Pradesh as it crosses the majority mark of 116 seats, according to the Election Commission data. The counting of votes is still underway. As per the ECI data, BJP won 126 seats and is leading on 38 seats. On the other hand, Congress won 37 seats and is leading on 28 seats. After the Congress suffered a defeat in Madhya Pradesh and BJP retained power in the state, Senior Congress leader Kamal Nath said that he had faith on the of the state. He further hoped that the BJP would not betray the people. Incumbent Chief Minister and BJP candidate from Budhni, Shivraj Singh Chouhan won by a margin of 1,64,951 votes, garnering a total of 1,04,974 votes. Tomorrow at 10 a.m., INDIA partners' parliamentary leaders will meet in the LoP chamber of Parliament. Election Commission orders suspension of Telangana Director General of Police (DGP) Anjani Kumar for violation of model code of conduct Despite the party's efforts to present a united front, infighting inside the Congress between the camps led by Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot and his erstwhile deputy Sachin Pilot may have harmed the party's prospects in some seats. Here are the latest figures given by ECI. At 4pm, Telangana remains the only state in Congress' hands with the BJP running away in Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan. Here are the latest figures given by ECI. The Bharatiya Adivasi Party achieved its first win in Madhya Pradesh by securing the Sailana seat in Ratlam district. Kamleshwar Dodiyar, the party's candidate, defeated Harsh Vijay Gehlot from the Congress party in the Sailana constituency. According to the Election Commission, Dodiyar won by a margin of 4,618 votes. This victory marks the first time that the Bharat Adivasi Party, which is based in Rajasthan, has emerged victorious in any election in Madhya Pradesh. According to ECI, BJP has won one seat and is leading in 160 in the 230-member assembly. Meanwhle, Congress is leading in 67 seats. Fresh data from the ECI has given an insight into how things stand at 3pm in Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Telangana. Telangana Chief Minister and Bharat Rashtra Samithi (BRS) founder K Chandrashekar Rao has been toppled by the Congress in the assembly elections. The grand old party leads in 64 seats to BRS' 40. BJP has not been able to make a mark with just 8 to their name. According to party sources, Prime Minister Narendra Modi is expected to speak to BJP workers in Delhi on Sunday evening, following the trends that show the BJP leading in three states during the assembly polls. Senior politician and chief of Nationalist Congress Party (NCP), Sharad Pawar has said that the result of the assembly elections will not impact the INDIA alliance. BJP's Vasundhara Raje has won from Jhalrapatan in Rajasthan. According to the Election Commission of India (ECI), here are the standings in Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, and Telangana at 2pm. The president of Raijor Dal in Assam, Akhil Gogoi said that as per the trends, the BJP seems to be lost in the South, it is almost clear that the people in the southern part of the nation are not willing to give their mandate to the saffron party. In contrast, the BJP has a significant presence in Madhya Pradesh and North India. Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan look set to to be added to the BJP's bouquet, while Congress has surged ahead in Telangana. In Chhattisgarh, things may go down to the wire. Initial counting trends on Sunday indicated that the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) is likely to maintain its power in Madhya Pradesh, with a significant victory over the Congress party. However, Union minister Faggan Singh Kulaste is currently falling behind in the Niwas constituency in the Mandla district. Chief Minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan is leading with a margin of 50,996 votes against his Congress opponent Vikram Mastal. Meanwhile, MP Congress chief Kamal Nath is leading by 16,559 votes against BJP candidate Vivek Bunty Sahu in Chhindwara, where the 10th round of counting is still ongoing. BJP Member of Parliament and Jhotwara candidate, Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore, is currently ahead by a margin of 11,732 votes after the fifteenth round of vote counting. He has received a total of 82,262 votes up until now. With early trends pointing at a clear majority for Congress, Telangana Bhavan, which is normally very busy, wore a dull look. There are hardly any leaders in the bhavan. Here's the latest trends from Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Telangana and Chhattisgarh at 1pm. Yellandu's Congress candidate, Koram Kanakaiah, emerges victorious in the election. Similarly, Ramagundam's Congress candidate, Raj Thakur, and Charminar's AIMIM candidate, Zulfikar, also secure wins. Deputy Chief Minister T S Singhdeo is currently behind by 7,000 votes in Ambikapur, with BJP's Rajesh Agrawal in the lead. In Kawardha, BJP's Vijay Sharma is leading by approximately 9,000 votes over Congress candidate Md Akbar. BJP's election in-charge for Rajasthan, Pralhad Joshi, stated that the selection of a new Chief Minister in Rajasthan will occur in a prompt and seamless manner. This comes as the saffron party appears poised to take control of the state from the Congress party. It is worth noting that the BJP did not announce a specific Chief Ministerial candidate prior to the election. Union Minister Pralhad Joshi stated that the Congress party gained an advantage in Telangana due to the anti-incumbency sentiment against the BRS. He also mentioned that the BJP needs to expand its presence in the state. Shivraj Singh Chouhan attributes the current trends in Madhya Pradesh to the capable leadership of Prime Minister Narendra Modi. According to trends, it appears that the BJP is on track to secure a significant victory in the Madhya Pradesh Assembly election. BJP has taken the lead in three out of the four states where counting of votes is underway. Telangana remains the only consolation in Congress' hands, according to trends. Manjinder Singh Sirsa states that in Chhattisgarh, the major concerns regarding the Congress party were the scams and corruption. Consequently, the people made the decision to remove this government from power. BJP has taken the lead over Congress in their only winnable option in Chhattisgarh and crossed the halfway mark. Here are the latest trends according to the Election Commission of India (ECI) in Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Telangana, and Chhattisgarh: Chhattisgarh BJP leader Raman Singh said that the people of the state have a lot of faith in PM Narendra Modi. Telangana assembly speaker P Srinivas Reddy is leading, while Congress' Ravinder Reddy trails. The Congress party has taken a significant lead in Telangana. If this trend continues, it will mark the first instance of a different party leading Telangana, instead of the BRS party led by K Chandrashekar Rao. BJP experiences significant progress in Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan, while Congress maintains a strong position in Telangana and holds a slight advantage in Chhattisgarh. BJP leader in Rajasthan, Satish Poonia, who is up against Congress' Prashant Sharma from the Amber constituency, is currently trailing. Telangana BJP leader Bandi Sanjay Kumar is currently trailing, while BRS leader G Kamalakar is leading from Karimnagar. As early trends showed BJP leading in Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh, the party workers kicked off celebrations. Political analyst Shankar Aiyar has likened Congress to playing T20, while BJP plays till the last ball, he said regarding the parties' standing in Madhya Pradesh. Union minister Gajendra Singh Shekhawat said the BJP will win in Rajasthan with huge majority. "Jadugar ka jadoo khatam ho gaya hai," he said in a veiled dig at Ashok Gehlot. The victory of Congress over BRS in Telangana is significant. In Chhattisgarh, our performance is commendable despite the BJP's attempts to use unethical tactics. In Rajasthan, this is our most impressive achievement, said Supriya Shrinate. After supporters of Kamal Nath put up posters earlier declaring him the next chief minister, the Congress leader is now trailing. With the BJP crossing the halfway mark in Madhya Pradesh, the Bhopal Congress office wore a deserted look. Telangana Congress chief Revanth Reddy is currently leading. BJP leader Vasundhara Raje has opened up a huge lead from Jhalrapatan. She currently leads with over 7,000 votes. As things stand, the BJP is set to retain Madhya Pradesh, and gain Rajasthan, while Congress will hold on to Chhattisgarh, wrest Telangana away, show early trends. Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot is leading from the Sardarpura seat, while Sachin Pilot continues to trail. Chhattisgarh Chief Minister Bhupesh Baghel hailed the mandate of the people in a post on X. आज जनादेश का दिन है.

जनता जनार्दन को प्रणाम.

सभी प्रत्याशियों को शुभकामनाएँ. Chhattisgarh BJP spokesperson RP Singh said that he is confident that the party will cross the halfway mark in the state. The workers of Lalu Prasad Yadav's Rashtriya Janata Dal reached Raipur at Congress' headquarters with sweets and fish. Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan exuded confidence saying, "BJP is going to form the government again with full majority." 'भारत माता की जय, जनता जनार्दन की जय'

आज मध्यप्रदेश विधानसभा चुनाव के नतीजे आ रहे हैं और मुझे विश्वास है कि जनता के आशीर्वाद व आदरणीय प्रधानमंत्री श्री @narendramodi जी के कुशल नेतृत्व में भारतीय जनता पार्टी पूर्ण बहुमत के साथ फिर सरकार बनाने जा रही है।

भाजपा के सभी… A prominent figure to keep an eye on - Baba Balaknath, a member of the BJP, who is considered a strong contender for the position of Chief Minister, is currently in the lead. Congress leader in Rajsthan, Sachin Pilot is trailing as shown by the early trends. BJP has crossed the halfway mark in Rajasthan, show early leads. Madhya Pradesh's BJP leader, VD Sharma, expressed that the BJP has the support and blessings of the people. He stated that the BJP in Madhya Pradesh has progressed with its principle of 'Unity and Development for All'. VD Singh attributed this success to the implementation of various government schemes. Congress has also gone past the midway point in Chhattisgarh and currently lead. Congress has crossed the halfway mark in Telangana, according to early trends. The BJP has a slight advantage in the states of Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan, while the Congress party is leading in Telangana and Chhattisgarh. KCR is currently in the lead in Gajwel but is falling behind in Kamareddy. BJP is leading in Rajasthan, while Congress is inching closer, according early trends. Chhattisgarh Chief Minister Bhupesh Baghel is currently behind in the race, while BJP's Raman Singh and former chief minister is in the lead. Congress leader Kamal Nath expressed his confidence in the voters of Madhya Pradesh and his belief in the party's triumph. Chhattisgarh BJP leader Arun Sao stated that the people of the state have shown their disapproval of the Congress party through their votes. As early trends show, here is a look at where the heavyweights in Telanaga stand: Party leaders are confident that the Congress will emerge victorious in Chhattisgarh by securing the required number of 75 seats. K Kavitha, the daughter of BRS leader and Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrashekar Rao, expressed assurance that her party will once again come to power in the state. Bookings for five-star hotels in Telangana has seen a sudden spurt with political parties rushing to prevent the poaching of MLAs. Earlly trends from Telangana showed the BJP and BRS ahead in two seats, while Congress is ahead on one. In Chhattisgarh, Congress is ahead, as shown in the early trends. The party is expected to retain power in the state. With the first leads coming in, the BJP is ahead in Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh. BJP leader Narottam Mishra stated that the party is confident in winning 125-150 seats in Madhya Pradesh. Posters expressing support for Congress leader Kamal Nath have been displayed in Madhya Pradesh. The posters carry the message, Heartfelt congratulations to respected Kamal Nath ji on becoming the Chief Minister. BJP leader Rajvardhan Singh Rathore expressed his belief that the people of Rajasthan have faith in Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the BJP. He confidently stated that the BJP will emerge victorious in Rajasthan. Rajvardhan Singh Rathore also expressed his confidence in the party's ability to secure a significant number of seats in the state. He compared the efficient governance of PM Modi to the ineffective governance of the Congress, referring to it as massive misgovernance. BJP member Prakash Reddy expressed that the prevailing dissatisfaction among the people in Telangana is sufficient to remove the KCR-led BRS government from power. The Congress party is optimistic about defeating the BJP in Madhya Pradesh, although the exit polls present a different viewpoint. This is an opportunity for the Congress to redeem themselves after Jyotiraditya Scindia's move to the BJP in 2020. The BJP, which has been in power in the state since 2003, has taken an interesting approach during this campaign. Before the vote counting in Chhattisgarh, Raman Singh from the BJP expressed his belief that his party will achieve a decisive majority in the state. Raman Singh confidently stated that the party will establish the government in the state, predicting that they will secure around 44-55 seats. According to poll experts, the Congress party is expected to have a clear advantage over the BJP in their efforts to maintain control in Chhattisgarh. In the previous assembly elections held in 2018, the Congress achieved a resounding victory by securing 68 seats, while the BJP only managed to secure 15 seats. In the state of Madhya Pradesh, both the Congress and the BJP are optimistic about their chances of winning in the upcoming assembly elections. The security measures have been increased at the counting centers in Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Chhattisgarh. According to officials, only individuals possessing valid passes will be granted access to the counting centers. The exit polls have predicted that the BJP will win two out of three heartland states, while the Congress will win one. Amid strong security measures, the counting of votes for the state legislative assemblies of Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, and Telangana will begin on Sunday. The assembly elections in 2023 will serve as a good yardstick ahead of 2024 Lok Sabha general elections. Extensive preparations are underway for a smooth process after the Election Commission of India (ECI) rescheduled the vote counting for Mizoram's assembly elections to December 4. The state election department assured that all arrangements are in place for the counting scheduled on Monday.