Rhino poaching in Assam is one of the major environmental issues and this issue continues in the region of Kaziranga National Park, Manas National Park and some other wild life sanctuaries of Assam. Kaziranga National Park, Pobitora wild life sanctuary and Orang National Park account almost 95% of the total wild one horned rhino in the world. But, unfortunately illegal rhino horn trade has been the main problem being faced by Assam. The Centre for South Asian Studies of Gauhati University organised a discussion on rhino poaching in Assam on Tuesday. In the open session a book on Assam rhino 'Mandalay' written by senior journalist of Pratidin Time, Mrinal Talukdar has been unveiled at the New Academic Building. 'Mandalay' is the first ever detailed research on the trail of rhino horns of Assam in South-East Asia, with the support of the Centre for South East Asian Studies, GU. The book gives details that how the entire network of illegal rhino horn trade has been operating through Manipur and Nagaland. The book reveals an indistinct figure called Lampu, whose actual name, location; photographs are not available with any investigation agency. These two networks of multi-million-dollar rhino horn are finally controlled from across the border between Kalay-Mandalay by Lampu. A Police official of Jakhalabandha Police Station and a forest official of Northern Range have come to light through 'Mandalay'. In spite of tremendous pressure, the two persons are doing their job with full dedication to overthrow the poachers' network. 'Mandalay' can be used by investigating agencies to curb poaching in Assam. Mandalay is an outcome of a 35-month travel by the senior journalist around the South East Asian region namely China, Vietnam, Cambodia, Thailand, Myanmar and India. An interactive session and lecture on India-China relations by Dr Nivedita Das Kundu from York University, Toronto held at the same venue. The book release programme was attended by outgoing GU Vice Chancellor Dr Mridul Hazarika; Prof Nani Gopal Mahanta, head, Centre for South Asian Studies Gauhati University; journalist Talukdar and Dr Das Kundu.