The BJP has resumed their "Borrowed leadership" doctrine in the North East and about to poach four time Meghalaya Chief Minister D D lapang and Mizoram Home Minister R Lalzirliana. Both of them resigned in the last 24 hours, Mr Lapang from the Congress  party and  Mr Lalzirliana from the Cabinet. Mr Lapang, is all set to walk in to the BJP while R Lalzirliana will join MNF, which is a BJP ally in the regional level. The BJP successfully started the Borrowed Leadership doctrine  first in Assam, by splitting Congress and then they experimented the same in Tripura to clinch the state from left. Now Mizroam is the last Congress bastion of the Congress in the region, which BJP is about to acquire via MNF, in the Assembly election slated this winter. Meanwhile In his resignation letter to Congress chief Rahul Gandhi, Mr. Lapang accuses the leadership of adopting a policy of "phasing out" senior leaders. In his resignation letter to Congress chief Rahul Gandhi on Thursday night, Mr. Lapang said he was resigning "reluctantly and with a heavy heart". The former Meghalaya Pradesh Congress Committee (MPCC) chief accused the All India Congress Committee (AICC) of embarking upon a policy of phasing out senior and elderly people. Meanwhile Internal differences within Congress in Mizoram took a turn for the worse on Friday after senior leader and state home minister R Lalzirliana resigned as the member of the Lal Thanhawla cabinet. The move comes two days after the disciplinary committee of the party served a show-cause notice to Lalzirliana, who is also the Congress' state unit vice-president, over reports that he could join a rival party. "It is true that I have resigned from the cabinet, but I am still a member of the Congress. I would not like to disclose the reasons for my decision," he said over the phone from Aizawl. The 69-year-old, who represents Tawi seat in Aizwal, also held the charge of power and electricity, rural development and excise and narcotics portfolios and was the second most powerful person in the cabinet headed by chief minister Thanhawla. Mizoram goes to polls later this year and the move by Lalzirliana could affect the Congress.