NEW DELHI: A teenaged boy was rescued from Delhi's Ghitorni recently. He had been trafficked from UP almost a year ago. The boy, along with his younger brother, was forced to work as a child labourer in a restaurant in the area after he fell into a financial crisis.
He said that as his father suffered from mental disability, the responsibility to make ends meet came on his shoulders.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoHe started working very early in his life and had to get his brother involved to manage the family expenditure. He was among 16 child labourers rescued from Delhi's Ghitorni on Saturday.
The number of reported child trafficking cases has gone up in Delhi, according to a report compiled by Games24x7 and Kailash Satyarthi Children's Foundation (KSCF). The report highlights a significant surge in child trafficking across various states after the Covid-19 pandemic. While Delhi recorded a 68% increase in the number of trafficked children, Uttar Pradesh recorded an increase of nearly six times.
The Child Trafficking in India report indicates that the national capital has become the hotspot for trafficked children, with over one-fourth of the children being rescued from Delhi.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoEven among the districts, five of the top 10 districts from where the trafficked children were rescued were in Delhi. The report said Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh are the top three states from where children were trafficked.
The data collected by the Games24x7's data science team is based on KSCF and its partners' intervention across 262 districts in 21 states in India between 2016 and 2022 has been collated.
According to the data, 13,549 children under the age of 18 were rescued between 2016 and 2022. The report said the industries that employ the maximum number of child labourers are hotels and dhabas (15.6%), followed by family-own automobile or transport units (13%), and garments (11.18%). The majority of children (80%) were found to be 13-17 years of age.
The 16 children rescued on Saturday were between 13 to 17 years of age. They were rescued in a raid by Bachpan Bachao Andolan and police. The raid was led by SDM Vasant Vihar and had members of the NGO Bal Vikas Dhara. Twelve establishments were sealed in the area.
The child labourers were from Bihar, UP and Nepal.