SITAPUR: Defence Minister Rajnath Singh on Saturday hit out at the Congress over corruption and said the grand old party calls itself 'hero' but it is 'zero' in doing development. Addressing a rally in Sitapur constituency of poll-bound Chhattisgarh, he said Naxalism will be eliminated from the state in the next 3-4 years and "forced" religious conversion will be prohibited if BJP is voted to power. 
Targeting the Bhupesh Baghel government over alleged scams, Singh said, "The Congress government has not done a single development work in the state. If the report card of this government is sought from the people then it will be 'zero bate sannata' in the report card." 
Videos08:43How Maharashtra Poll Result Could Be Bellwether For BJP; Abhijit Iyer Mitra Decodes4 days ago02:15BJP’s Ayodhya Debacle: How Dalit Revolt Against Saffron Party Resulted In Shock Verdict4 days ago03:33NDA's Maharashtra Partners Upset With MoS Post In Modi 3.013 days ago03:02Modi 3.0 Cabinet Portfolios Out: Home, Defence, Finance, Foreign Affairs With BJP13 days ago03:41Narendra Modi Takes Oath As India's Prime Minister For Historic Third Consecutive Term14 days ago06:29'Failed To Cross 100...': Modi Mocks 'Loser' INDIA Bloc At Mega NDA Meeting16 days ago04:55'Congress Back To Old Ways': Next Move After Lok Sabha Election Result Decoded | Watch16 days ago04:41UCC, Farm Laws & More: Key Decisions By PM Modi In NDA 3.0 | 'Allies To Dictate Terms'16 days ago03:49'BJP Lost U.P. Due To Non-Performing MPs' Biggest Biggest Poll Debacle | Watch16 days ago03:06Khalistan Protesters In Canada Stun With New Indira Gandhi Assassination Float; India Fumes16 days ago123456They are "zero" in giving a good government and "zero" in doing development, he said referring to the ruling Congress. 
"Despite that, Congress leaders claim themselves to be heroes. They are not heroes. They are zeroes. Time has come to bid them farewell in the elections," he said. 
Left Wing Extremism was brought under control to a great extent during the BJP rule in Chhattisgarh (2003-2018), he said. "But it is rapidly rising (in Congress rule). If BJP comes to power in the state, LWE will be eliminated in the next 3-4 years," the defence minister said. 
Targeting Congress over religious conversion, he said, "I have learnt that rampant religious conversion is taking place in Chhattisgarh which is also a matter of concern. Why should anyone be converted by being lured? If BJP comes to power we will put a ban on such conversion," he said. 
Singh alleged that the law and order situation in the state collapsed after the Congress was elected to power in 2018. 
"Offences like murder have become a common thing. Daughters of several families have gone missing which is a major challenge. Human trafficking and the drug trade are on the rise. It has become necessary to uproot the Congress from the state," he said. 
BJP has fielded Ram Kumar Toppo, a former CRPF personnel, from Sitapur seat against Congress nominee and incumbent state minister Amarjeet Bhagat. 
Sitapur is among the 70 constituencies that will go to polls on November 17 in the second phase of the two-phased elections for the 90-member state assembly. 
The first phase of polls on 20 seats was held on November 7.