GURGAON: Three people, including two women, have been arrested in Faridabad for allegedly abducting a newborn from BK Hospital on Tuesday. Police said the suspects planned to sell the newborn for Rs 1. 5 lakh and had struck a deal but were tracked down by cops within 12 hours, before he could be handed over to their clients.
According to the police, the accused — Deepak, Anita, and Pooja — are all in their mid-20s and from Delhi.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
The newborn’s father, Sunil Kumar, who lives in Faridabad, told cops he arrived at the government hospital with his wife and mother around 10pm on Sunday.
“My son was born around 3am on Monday. After the delivery, my wife was shifted to a ward and I went out for some work. When I returned around 10pm, I saw a woman in a yellow uniform playing with my baby. When questioned, she said she was a staff nurse on night shift to take care of newborns. ”
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoOn Tuesday, Sunil said, he returned to the ward around 6. 45am.
“I found the woman still on duty there. She left around 7am saying she was going to wash her face. My wife was asleep. I suddenly noticed that our son was missing. I then recalled that the nurse was carrying something wrapped in a towel when she left. I immediately searched the entire floor and hospital premises, but couldn't find my child or that woman. I realised she had abducted my baby. ”
Sunil approached the police and filed a complaint around 8am, following which an FIR was registered against the accused under IPC sections 365 (kidnapping), 370 (trafficking), and 120B (criminal conspiracy) at SGM police station on Tuesday.
Police commissioner Rakesh Arya said as soon as the FIR was filed, five teams from the crime branch, led by the DCP (crime) and ACP (crime), were formed to search for the accused
. “We also reviewed over 100 hours of CCTV footage from the hospital and nearby areas. On the footage, we saw the woman — Anita — leaving with the baby and boarding an autorickshaw at Ajronda Mod. From there, she took another auto to the Badarpur border, and another to Sultanpuri. ”
To evade cops, Anita was wearing a mask and had covered her head with a scarf. “We managed to identify the auto that dropped her off at Sultanpuri. We were then able to trace Deepak, to whom Anita had handed over the newborn at Sultanpuri. He was arrested in the evening and the baby was rescued,” Arya added.
On the basis of the information revealed by Deepak, police traced Anita and Pooja too and arrested them at the Badarpur border around 8pm.
Police said Anita was living in Delhi with her friend Deepak. Pooja, her friend, came to know about a baby boy being born at the hospital from an acquaintance and informed her.
According to the police, the trio had earlier attempted to kidnap a baby from the same ward, but the bid was foiled.
Cops said they are investigating if the trio is part of a trafficking ring.
They were acting on the instructions of a Faridabad resident — Dev, allegedly the mastermind — and were planning to sell the newborn to a woman for Rs 1. 5 lakh, officers said.
“Nobody in the hospital suspected Anita. She convinced the hospital staff that she was a family member and the newborn’s family that she was a nurse. Anita was planning to sell the baby to a woman identified as Jyoti near Anand Vihar Metro station,” the CP said.
The trio was produced in court and has been sent to two days’ police remand for questioning.
“We will further interrogate the accused. Efforts are under way to arrest Dev and Jyoti too,” a senior police officer said.