Ranchi: In a bid to generate awareness on girls’ empowerment and take steps against gender discrimination, the students of the Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas (KGBVs) and the Jharkhand Balika Awasiya Vidyalayas (JBAVs) are tieing rakhis on the wrists of their classmates under the state government’s ‘Raksha Bandhan, Suraksha Ka Bandhan’ campaign. 
The school education and literacy department along with the United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF) and the Child in Need Institute (CINI) launched the campaign across the state to spread the message, ‘Behan Ki Raksha Behan Karegi, Ek Surakshit Desh Gadhegi’ (Sisters will protect sisters, will build a safe country) on Wednesday.The week-long campaign aims to generate awareness among the youths on issues like child marriage, female foeticide, sexual abuse, human trafficking, and domestic violence, said an official of the Jharkhand Education Project Council (JEPC).
JEPC director Kiran Kumari Pasi said, “The campaign hopes to address the issue of gender discrimination prevalent in society. Girls’ solidarity are vital to combat gender stereotypes and create a child-friendly and women-sensitive society. Together, the girls will become pillars of support and strength for each other.”
Activities planned for the week include slogan-writing and painting competitions on women in non-traditional roles, screening of stories and films, and skits performed by girls on women and adolescent issues.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreThe chief of Jharkhand unit of UNICEF, Kanika Mitra, cited the significance of traditional festivals like ‘raksha bandhan’ in promoting gender awareness. “The campaign aims to expand the concept of protective love between brothers and sisters to include solidarity among the KGBV girls. Under this campaign, girls are encouraged to support each other in various aspects of their lives, such as education, self-esteem, and raising their collective voice against child marriage and exploitation,” she said.
Nishi Parbha, the assistant programme manager of JEPC, said, “Girls are taking oaths to support each other, continue their education, and challenge negative gender norms. The goal is for girls to take the awareness and messages they receive through this campaign back to their families and communities.”
Priya Kumari, a Class XII student of KGBV-Namkum, said, “A collective pledge taken by all the girls to support each other, tackle challenges, defy gender norms, and sustain education will contribute towards the betterment of the society.”