In a recent legal pronouncement, a sessions court in Bombay adjudicated upon a case involving the conviction of a 35-year-old homemaker for forcing her minor daughter into prostitution and living on the earnings derived thereby.
Background
The case of the prosecution (that is, the daughter/victim) was that the victim was compelled for prostitution by her mother and that her mother was living on the earning of the victim.The victim reported the matter to the police with the assistance of a friend, leading to a raid on one of the accused’s residence. The charges included offenses under sections 370(A), 506(II), 323 of the IPC, and sections 4 and 5 of the PITA Act, as well as sections 7, 8, and 17 of the POCSO Act.
READ: Mother sentenced to 9 years' RI for pushing teenager into prostitution
Analysis
Basis the evidence produced, court found it evident that the mother used to send the customers and asked the victim that she has to do prostitution. The court found sufficient evidence to show that the accused mother was living on earning of the victim and that the victim was exploited by her. The mother was compelling the victim for prostitution, which means she had recruited her for sexual exploitation. The court held that recruiting a person for exploitation comes under the definition of trafficking. 
Offense of trafficking is defined under Section 370 of IPC. The offense has been classified into 5 categories, thus covering every aspect of the commission of such offences. Section 370 of IPC prescribes that whoever, for the purpose of exploitation, (a) recruits, (b) transports, (c) harbours, (d) transfers, or (e) receives, a person or persons, by—(a) using threats, or (b) using force, or any other form of coercion, or (c) by abduction, or (d) by practising fraud, or deception, or (e) by abuse of power, or (f) by inducement, including the giving or receiving of payments or benefits, in order to achieve the consent of any person having control over the person recruited, transported, harboured, transferred or received, commits the offence of trafficking.
Section 370A IPC lays down the rigorous punishment for a term not less than five years which may extend to seven years for child trafficking. The same offense involving adults carries a minimum three-year sentence, extendable to five years, along with a fine. The punishment to be sentenced to a convict of the offence of exploitation of a trafficked person has been classified on the basis of age of the trafficked person.
Section 370 and 370A IPC provides for comprehensive measures to counter the menace of human trafficking including trafficking of children for exploitation in any form including physical exploitation or any form of sexual exploitation, slavery, servitude, or the forced removal of organs. The Criminal Law (amendment) Act 2013 the oldSection 370 of the IPC with new Section 370 and 370A IPC based on the recommendations given by the Justice J.S. Verma Committee, constituted in the aftermath of the December 2012 Nirbhaya rape incident. Justice J.S. Verma Committee took cognizance of the menace of trafficking of woman and girls / children for the purposes of sexual exploitation, and thought it proper to recommend the insertion of this new provision creating a new offence.
As per the court, the charges under section 370(A)(1) of the IPC were established against the mother and she was sentenced to suffer for offence under section 370A of IPC, sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for the period of seven (7) years and fine of Rs. 1,000/- (Rupees One Thousand Only), in default, to suffer simple imprisonment for fifteen(15)days
The court also held the accused mother liable under section 4 of the Immoral Trafficking (Prevention) Act, 1956.
Section 4 of the ITP Act penalises any person who knowingly lives on the earnings of the prostitution of any other person. It further provides that where such earnings relate to the prostitution of a child or a minor, the punishment shall be imprisonment for a term of not less than seven years and not more than ten years. 
The Section further provides that where any person over the age of eighteen years is proved— “(a) to be living with, or to be habitually in the company of, a prostitute; or (b) to have exercised control, direction or influence over the movements of a prostitute in such a manner as to show that such person is aiding, abetting or compelling her prostitution; or (c) to be acting as a tout or pimp on behalf of a prostitute, it shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that such person is knowingly living on the earnings of prostitution of another person.”
The ITP Act is the premier legislation for prevention of trafficking for commercial sexual exploitation. The Act defines “prostitution” as the sexual exploitation or abuse of persons for commercial purposes. The aim of the legislation, as made abundantly clear in the Act, is to inhibit or abolish commercialized vice namely, the trafficking in women and girls for the purpose of prostitution as an organized means of living. ITP Act provides punishment to the persons maintaining a brothel house (Section 3) living on the earnings of the prostitution (Section 4), procuring, inducing or taking person for the sake of prostitution (Section 5), detaining a person in premises where prostitution is carried on (Section 6), prostitution in or in the vicinity of public place (Section 7), seducing or soliciting for purpose of prostitution (Section 8) and seduction of a person in custody (Section 9).
In the instant case, for the offence punishable under Section 4 of ITP Act, the court sentenced the accused mother to suffer rigorous imprisonment for period of nine (9) years and shall pay fine of Rs. 2,000/- (Rupees Two Thousand Only), in default, to suffer simple imprisonment for the period of one (1) month.
In this case, the court further observed that so far as section 506 (criminal intimidation) and 323 (voluntarily causing hurt)is concerned, it was seen that these allegations were vague. No particular incidence was referred by the victim when she was either abused or assaulted. Thus, for want of evidence the charge under section 506(ii) and 323 of the IPC failed.
The convicted woman, who was arrested in 2014, has already spent 10 years in jail so her sentence will be set off against the period she has already undergone in jail.
Charges under Protection of Children from Sexual offences (POCSO) Act, 2012: It is a special law to protect children from sexual abuse and exploitation. It provides precise definitions for different forms of sexual abuse, including penetrative and non-penetrative sexual assault, sexual harassment.
In the instant case, the case of the prosecution was that the accused abetted the crime punishable under the POCSO Act. However, the court held that unless the charge against the principal accused is established, there is no question of establishing the charge of abetment against any other person.
No leniency in such circumstances: It is pertinent to note that, in its judgement, the court has highlighted that being the mother of victim, the accused ought to have taken necessary precaution to protect the victim, but she not only lived on the earning of the victim but was also assaulting the victim on refusal. Hence, the court did not show any leniency towards the accused.
In another case, the Bombay High Court recently convicted and sentenced a man to ten years of rigorous imprisonment for bringing a 14-year-old girl to a red-light area in Nashik with the intention of inducing her into the business of prostitution. Justice PK Chavan observed that the cases of inducing minors for the purpose of prostitution are on the rise, and the convict, does not deserve sympathy. 
In another case, emphasizing that the daughters are the pride and honor of the family in a civilized society, the Allahabad High Court denied bail to a man who forcibly indulged minor victim in prostitution and also committed rape upon them.
It is pertinent to note here that, for the crimes under Section 370 and ITP Act, though the essentials of the offence are the same, it is the quantum of punishment that is higher in case of crime against a child/minor. While deciding the quantum of punishments, the courts also take into consideration the age of victim, relation with the accused, severity of the offenses, etc.
Conclusion
The recent judgment highlights the legal consequences of trafficking and child exploitation, emphasizing the need for stringent measures to combat these heinous crimes. The legal framework, including the Immoral Trafficking (Prevention) Act, Indian Penal Code, and POCSO Act, provides a comprehensive approach to address different facets of such offenses. As society grapples with the alarming rise in cases of child trafficking for sexual exploitation, these legal provisions play a crucial role in holding perpetrators accountable and ensuring justice for the victims.