NEW DELHI: The National Commission for Protection of Child Rights has written to chief secretaries of all states and UTs asking them to be vigilant of the threat of trafficking in the garb of transporting children from one state to another.
Bringing focus on the vulnerability of school dropouts and out of school children, NCPCR has recommended that state authorities must ensure that all children in the age of 6-14 years are enrolled in neighbourhood schools and receive formal education under the Right to Education Act 2009 that provides for free and compulsory education till class 8.
It notes that over the past few days, both the national and state commissions have intervened to rescue numerous children who were being transported across state borders. ln one such incident on April 26, as many as 95 children were rescued while allegedly being illegally transported from Bihar to Uttar Pradesh.
The Commission has recommended that the state authorities must ensure that in all such cases where it is found that money is being raised in name of children and children are illegally taken from one place to another, the concerned investigating officer may consider taking action as per the Juvenile Justice Act, 2015 and Section 370 (trafficking) of the Indian Penal Code.
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreNCPCR chairperson Priyank Kanoongo has asked states to issue directions to district magistrates to enhance vigilance in the districts to prevent the illegal transportation of children. He has also sent a copy of the letter to the director general of police of all states, ministry of education, Airport Authority of India and the Railway Board.
Elaborating on the case of 95 children, Kanoongo states in the letter that the Uttar Pradesh State Commission for Protection of Child Rights (UP SCPCR) rescued the children in Ayodhya and presented them before the Child Welfare Committee (CWC). Following counseling sessions, orders were issued to relocate these children to the govt children’s home for boys in Lucknow.
“Such incidents once again underscore the reality that many children in lndia continue to remain out of school and are susceptible to violence. The 95 rescued children were found to be attending unregistered an Madrasa in the Saharanpur district of Uttar Pradesh. They disclosed that they were coerced into carrying brick, cleaning toilets, and endured physical and mental abuse. Instead of attending formal schools, these children were confined to the Madrasa,” Kanoongo said in his letter.
“As per the reports the children were not sent to any formal school and subsequently were devoid of their right to benefit from the entitlements given under RTE,” he said.