AGARTALA: In a joint operation, Tripura and Assam police on Saturday arrested two persons at Boaliapara in Mohanpur, about 35 km from the city, for their alleged involvement in trafficking of Rohingya refugees from Bangladesh through Tripura.
Police said during the search, nine Aadhaar cards, two PAN cards and several Bangladesh documents were recovered from the residence of one of the accused, who has been identified as Kajal Sarkar, an Indian citizen.Another person, a suspected Bangladesh national identified as Bishnu Chandra Mandal, was arrested from the same house.
According to reports, Mandal illegally crossed the border and took shelter in Kajal's house, and both of them were allegedly involved in human trafficking. The crackdown on the trafficking network was a result of an ongoing investigation into a case of illegal migration of Rohingya refugees into the country. The probe prompted Assam Police officials to launch a search for an agent aiding the migration in exchange for money.
A team of Assam Police arrived here two days ago and intercepted the communication of both the accused with the help of Sidhai and Lefunga police stations of Mohanpur. Kajal was traced to the bordering village of West Tripura.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo"Since the case is registered in another state, Assam Police will seek transit remand of the accused persons in the court. If allowed to do so by the court, the Assam Police will take the accused in its custody for the next course of investigation to track down the illegal migrants in the country," a senior police officer said here on Sunday.
Expressing concern over rising cases of human trafficking and drug peddling through Tripura, chief minister Manik Saha said continuous efforts are being taken by the Tripura Police, BSF and the railway police to nab Bangladesh nationals and Rohingya who have been illegally using Tripura as their corridor.