GURGAON: Convinced, the 16-year-old took a flight from Assam to Delhi, hoping that the job promised to her at a garment manufacturing factory would pay for her younger brother’s education and her family’s bills.

But the teenager, whose father is a daily wage earner and mother died years ago in their hometown in Udalguri, was brought to a building in the bustling lanes of Nathupur earlier this August. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
It didn’t take long for her to realise that the building’s glossy façade was misleading. Inside it were small rooms with no windows, and two other girls, including a minor, being forced into sex work. There was no way to escape – a biometric system allowed entry and exit only to the two agents who had brought her there. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More“The building did not attract any attention and the area was busy. It looked lavish from the outside, but it was disgusting and horrendous… I was shocked when I went inside while rescuing the girls,” said Dr Ghritashri Bhuyan Narula, a representative of the Northeast community in the Delhi Police.
Narula, who was the first one to be alerted about the sex trafficking racket on Tuesday, said minors and young women from poorer families are often targeted by gangs. 
“They are lured with jobs outside their home state by agents. The agents meet these women in person or offer jobs on social media,” said Udalguri SP Pushkin Jain.
But the gangs have come up with new ways to avoid detection, Narula says.
“Traffickers have started taking the girls to different states through flights. It’s done to save time and avoid getting caught as traveling by trains was common, and cops and passengers could always suspect human trafficking,” she said. 
At the rented building, the teenager told cops she was deprived of proper meals and forced to be with multiple men, most from Delhi or NCR cities.
The 16-year-old managed to get access to a mobile phone and alert one of her relatives, who reached out to Narula. The teenager was given Narula’s number, and she called her on Tuesday morning.
“All she said was ‘take me with you, or they will kill my soul’,” Narula said.
She and two other girls were rescued with the help of city police later in the day. “It was risky to bring her home from hell. We could only do it because of the 16-year-old’s determination,” Narula said.
The teenager is undergoing therapy in Delhi and she will be taken back to her home in Udalguri after that.
The two agents — aged 25 and 30, from Rajasthan and Delhi — were arrested from the city, and police in Assam are trying to trace others involved. A case was registered in Udalguri under sections 370 (trafficking), 363 (kidnapping) of the IPC and the Immoral Trafficking Act, 1956.
“We are interrogating the accused. We are also waiting for the teenager to get back and then the investigation will proceed,” the Udalguri SP said.