US Assistant Secretary of State, Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs Lee Satterfield, who is in Varanasi to attend the G20 culture ministerial meeting, caught up with TOI’s Swati Mathur during her maiden visit to India. Excerpts from the interview:
As head of the US delegation at the G20 Culture ministerial meeting in Varanasi this weekend, what do you expect to see as the main takeaways?
I think it is exciting that there is a culture ministerial in the G20.It is a recognition that culture policy is security policy and that we must bring these issues right alongside all the other important conversations that are happening between our G20 countries. It is a recognition of the continuation of the importance of culture diplomacy.
The last G20 meeting in Indonesia ended without a consensus. India is now attempting to find common ground around culture, with its ‘Culture Unites All’ theme. Do you see a consensus emerging in Varanasi?
We agree on so much and I know that we will be able to have a declaration that includes all of our shared goals and values that includes not only cultural heritage, but also the obvious role of stopping illicit trafficking and repatriation of stolen artefacts, which is a priority of this entire group.
What are challenges you see in this area, especially because many museums, galleries and private collections function independently of government control?
Repatriation is a very important priority to the US. President (Biden) and Prime Minister (Modi) spoke about it during the historic visit in June and made it one of the pillars of cooperation. The US and India are working very closely on a Cultural Property Agreement. We are very excited to put together this bilateral agreement that allows us to basically formalise the work that we are already doing. It allows the US to also bring to bear the whole of government to put efforts toward not only repatriation, but also stop illicit trafficking to begin with.
Is that something that may be firmed up before you return to the US?
No, because there is a long process. We are really at the beginning stages of that process, but it is something that the President and PM agreed to do during the visit in June. Now I and others are following up to see that through and we are excited. There is no established timeline. What is significant is that the US has only 25 such agreements with other countries around the World.
You have also spoken of two-way mobility for students. Can we expect to see more American universities setting up centres in India?
We are really excited about India’s National Education Policy, which has great potential for US universities to build greater familiarity about programmes and opportunities in the US. NEP will open many more doors for the US to partner with India. We rely on the Open Doors Study to track student numbers. So far, India is trending up and we are thrilled about that. Some of the things I see India doing now, like opening up university partnerships by having dual degree opportunities which will only pave the way for more.
Covid took a toll on visa processing, including those for students. Are systems in place now to facilitate faster processing?
The US prioritises student visas ... there is a perception about not being able to get the visa. But I want to tell everyone that we are open for business. There is a place for everyone in the US and you just need to find what works for you. Students can avail free advisory on EducationUSA about colleges and universities and community colleges in the US.