NEW DELHI: Terror and narco-financing trends were among the key topics of discussion at the National Security Strategies Conference chaired by Union home minister Amit Shah here on Thursday. During the conference, he urged all states and agencies to keep up the pressure on drug dealers and trafficking networks as part the government’s 'zero tolerance' approach.
The first day of the 2-day conference saw Shah brainstorming with the national and state-level security brass on issues relating to national security; use of forensic science in investigation; cyber security framework; social challenges; and emergency preparedness for nuclear, chemical and radiological exigencies. "Under the leadership of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, the government is committed to ensure a safe and secure nation by strengthening all aspects of national security mechanism," he told the more than 750 participants, including those working at the cutting edge and subject experts, who joined the ‘hybrid’ conference from across the country.
Among those who attended the deliberations in Delhi were two junior home ministers, deputy national security advisers (NSAs), home secretary, DGPs and IGPs of all states and Union territories, heads of various Central armed police forces and the intelligence brass.
During his interactions, the home minister emphasised the crucial role played by district-level police officers in managing the country’s internal security. He also urged the cutting-edge police officers to enhance the use of scientific tools in investigation to secure better conviction rates.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoAppreciating the work done by different agencies in areas of narco-terror and trafficking, Shah asked them to continue building upon their achievements and not let complacency set in.
Prior to the commencement of the conference, Shah paid homage to police martyrs by laying a wreath at the Martyrs Column, erected in the memory of anonymous martyrs who laid down their lives in the line of duty.
Shah will be addressing the concluding session of the conference on Friday.