Kolkata: Multiple trafficking survivors on Monday shared their experiences of mental trauma, even after being rescued, calling for proper counselling and rehabilitation so that they can try to lead a normal life. They were speaking under the national platform of Indian Leadership Forum Against Trafficking (ILFAT), by and for the survivors of human trafficking.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe experiences were varied — while one saw her counsellor refusing to sit with her without consent of her family since she was a minor, another was made to spend a night in jail with criminals as there was no other place in the police station where she could stay.
“Now, almost a decade after I was rescued, the trauma refuses to leave me. My experience has taught me that the provision of mental health care at an early stage is the key to healing,” said Sabrina Khan (name changed), a survivor leader from ILFAT. Sabrina was trafficked from Bengal in 2012. Her case is ongoing in a court and her trafficker has been arrested.
Sanchita Khatun (name changed) was 13 when she was trafficked, and her case is pending in court. “Today, 13 years on, I am married but still have bouts of depression and moodiness. I have still not seen a counsellor. The lack of mental health professionals deprives us of the opportunity to talk to someone who can help us address the root causes of our traumas,” said Khatun. 
Dipti Mondal (name changed) was trafficked in 2015 before she managed to gather courage and get off a running train in UP. Since her rescue, she has been creating awareness about human trafficking across Bengal districts. “I was trafficked at 15 in 2015. I was adored before the incident. After my rescue, I was isolated. Often, the trauma stems more from societal stigma than the actual trafficking. Awareness drives and sensitization meetings with family and community members on the importance of mental health should be encouraged. The NGO Goranbose Gram Bikash Kendra (GGBK) and its survivor collective Bandhanmukti have played an instrumental role in my journey towards healing,” Dipti said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More“In the absence of mental health support, the trauma can often drive the survivor to commit suicide. Affordable and accessible mental health care at the community level is significant,” said Piyali Saha (name changed), another survivor.
“A number of studies have identified the serious and complex mental health needs of trafficking survivors. The majority of research focuses on post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD),” said a counsellor associated with ILFAT.