The Jeffrey Epstein list is finally out and the names of high-profile celebrities just continue to grow. On Wednesday, more than 900 pages of documents from the civil lawsuit filed against Epstein's former associate Ghislaine Maxwell by Virginia Giuffre, a victim of their human trafficking enterprise, were made public. To everyone's surprise, the highly anticipated list featured the names of over 150 people, including high- profile celebrities like Leonardo DiCaprio, Cate Blanchett, Michael Jackson and Naomi Campbell among others. 
The unsealed court documents reveal names of apparent connections and the extensive network of people associated with Epstein, who was convicted of sex trafficking charges before his death.

However, it must be noted that the released documents name-drop several well-known public figures and actors alike. It is crucial to emphasize that the inclusion of these names does not imply any wrongdoing or participation on their part. Many of the names in the list, including that of Oscar-winners DiCaprio, Blanchette, Lucas and others, were merely mentioned in passing and did not imply that they were in any way involved with Epstein.
In the document, one of the witnesses claimed that Epstein "would be on the phone a lot at that time, and one time he said, 'Oh, that was Leonardo, or that was Cate Blanchett or Bruce Willis. That kind of thing."

When the person was probed further if they had met Leonardo DiCaprio, the response stated, "I have not."

Naomi Campbell was mentioned in the transcripts and in a video. Her name popped up on the list when a victim narrated an incident that involved giving an unidentified man an erotic massage and sexual intercourse "around the same time that Naomi Campbell had a birthday party" at a French hotel that had Epstein and Ghislaine in attendance.

Meanwhile, according to the documents, a witness said he had met Michael Jackson, but denied having massaged him.

Other celebrity name-drops include Kevin Spacey, Bruce Willis, Cameron Diaz, George Lucas, alongside previously mentioned actors appeared 
In one document, which included the transcription of alleged victim Johanna Sjoberg's May 2016 deposition, she was questioned about encounters with various high-profile personalities. Sjoberg denied being coerced into massaging notable figures like George Lucas and President Donald Trump.

The revelation of these names has ignited discussions about the extent of Epstein's connections within the celebrity sphere, raising questions about the nature of their involvement with the disgraced financier. 
Certain sections of the records will remain undisclosed, particularly those that reveal the identities of individuals who were minors when subjected to sexual abuse by Jeffrey Epstein. 
Epstein, who faced sex trafficking charges, died by suicide in a federal prison in Manhattan in August 2019 while awaiting trial.

In 2021, Maxwell was found guilty of exploiting and trafficking underage girls, receiving a 20-year prison sentence. She has subsequently filed an appeal against her conviction.
It is essential to note that, as of now, none of the individuals mentioned in the recent documents, with the exception of Epstein and Maxwell, have faced any criminal charges.
Paula Abdul accuses 'American Idol' executive producer Nigel Lythgoe of sexual assault and harassment; files lawsuit