CHHATRAPATI SAMBHAJINAGAR: The probe into the seizure of drugs worth Rs 250 crore by the Ahmedabad crime branch and directorate of revenue intelligence teams in Chhatrapati Sambhajinagar has now revealed that the processed cocaine found at the key accused's bungalow was likely sourced from South America, while the ketamine found at industrial units was meant for sale in European and Canadian markets.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Senior officials of the DRI and Ahmedabad crime branch have independently said they were working to bust the mephedrone manufacturing racket, and the seizure of cocaine and ketamine came as a big surprise to them.
Now the law enforcement agencies have started working on tracking the routes used by the drug peddlers to bring these banned materials into India and smuggling the processed drugs out of the country.
Chaitanya Mandlik, the deputy commissioner of police Ahmedabad crime branch told TOI, "The cocaine smuggled into India from South America, especially Columbia, is usually in a raw form. It is processed to make a finished product, which is then sold in the market. One of the accused, Jiteshkumar Hinhoriya, using his experience in the pharmaceutical companies, started processing large amounts of cocaine before dispatching the same to clients in different parts of the country."
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteThe officer that ketamine, which is known as a 'date rape drug', does not have a huge market in India. "The US, Europe and Canada are the big ketamine markets. Prima facie, it appears that the processed drug was sent to Chennai from where it got smuggled out to foreign destinations," said Mandlik. A senior DRI official, who did not wish to be named, said: "It is safe to say that the manufacturing and processing units busted in Chhatrapati Sambhajinagar were of international standards."
The officer said that during the profiling of the key accused, it was found that he had served as the technical director of an FDA-approved ketamine manufacturing company for a decade."Using the contacts developed at that company, he started sourcing the raw materials required for ketamine production without any bills. This made it difficult to track him," said another officer of the Ahmedabad crime branch.
Another officer said almost 23,000 litres of raw material were seized at Geeta Chemicals, in MIDC Waluj. Results of the chemical and forensic analysis of the samples are expected in another two days.