Bhopal/Jabalpur: In a significant judgement, MP high court held that charges under section 5 & 6 of the Immoral Trafficking (Prevention) Act, 1956, can be framed against a person who ‘procures’ a girl for prostitution.
The court observed that a trial court is well within its right to frame charges against a person if it’s convinced that prima facie a case is made out against him and in this case, the fact that the petitioner had ‘procured’ the girl by paying money for prostitution is sufficient ground for the trial court to frame charges against him under Immoral Trafficking (Prevention) Act, 1956. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Dismissing a petition filed by Rishabh Khare challenging framing of charges against him by the trial court on the ground that a customer who has paid to ‘procure’ a girl for prostitution can't be prosecuted under Immoral Trafficking (Prevention) Act, 1956, the bench of Justice G S Ahluwalia said, "In view of the fact that there is specific allegation that the girl was procured by the applicant for the purpose of prostitution, this court is of considered opinion that no case is made out warranting interference. The application fails and is hereby dismissed.”
Khare was caught by the police during a raid on a house in Jabalpur where a sex racket was allegedly being run. The police had charged him under sections 3,4.5 & 6 of the Immoral Trafficking (Prevention) Act but the trial court of judicial magistrate first class dropped section 3 & 4 but retained section 5 & 6 of the Act. The petitioner had filed a revision petition before the sessions court and when it was rejected, he moved the high court.
The high court, while dismissing the petition, however, said that while framing charges, a court is only concerned whether the material placed on record is sufficient to indicate that the accused prima facie may have committed the crime without looking into whether the charges against him could be proved in the trial for his conviction.
Referring to several supreme court judgements in this regard, Justice Ahluwalia said "The settled legal position, as mentioned in the above decisions, is that if on the basis of material on record the court could form an opinion that the accused might have committed offence it can frame the charge, though for conviction the conclusion is required to be proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused has committed the offence. At the time of framing of the charges the probative value of the material on record cannot be gone into, and the material brought on record by the prosecution has to be accepted as true at that stage Before framing a charge the court must apply its judicial mind on the material placed on record and must be satisfied that the commitment of offence by the accused was possible. Whether, in fact, the accused committed the offence, can only be decided in the trial,” said the judge.