GUWAHATI: Police on Monday detained a woman from lower Assam's Barpeta district for questioning in connection with the case of child abuse by the city-based doctor couple. 
Police picked her up based on the statements of psychiatrist Sangeeta Datta's personal assistant Utpala Bose, who is currently in a five-day police custody.
According to sources, Utpal had arranged the girl child for the doctor couple - Datta and her husband Wailul Islam, who is a gastrointestinal and advanced general surgeon, in exchange for money.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
"The case against the doctor couple, which was registered under various sections of the Indian Penal Code and Protection of Children from Sexual Offences, has now unveiled the angle of child trafficking also. The case is being investigated thoroughly to unearth the nexus, if there is any, and to find out the biological parents of the girl," said sources.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreMeanwhile, Islam was produced before a lower court here in Guwahati after his 10-day police custody ended on Monday. The court sent him to judicial custody. However, his wife Datta is still in police custody.
After the police rescued the adopted girl from the couple's residence on May 5, they are saved their adopted son. Police said the medical examination reports established that both the children were victims of penetrative sexual assault.
Islam was arrested on May 5 and Datta on May 6. 
Meanwhile, the child welfare committee, Kamrup (Metro) district said though the children have recovered from the physical wounds to a great extent, they are still in trauma as they do not want to talk to people or come out of their room.
A team of expert doctors has been relentlessly monitoring the health of the children, who have been kept at the child welfare facility.