PUNE: The Wakad police on Saturday claimed to have busted a child trafficking racket and rescued a seven-day-old baby boy from the clutches of the racketeers. “A Wakad police team, led by senior inspector Nivritti Kolhatkar, arrested six women, including the infant’s mother, who had agreed to sell her son for Rs5 lakh,” assistant commissioner of police Vishal Hire said. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
He said the police investigations revealed that the gang of women had sold five babies in the last one year. “Our investigations are on,” Hire said. Sub-inspector Sachin Chavan of the Wakad police said the arrested women were from Dhankawdi, Yerawada and Hadapsar areas in Pune city. “They are from middle class families,” he said. 
PUNE: Chavan said constable Vandu Gire received a tip-off that a gang of women were involved in child trafficking. “We contacted these women through a decoy. They agreed to arrange a baby boy for Rs 5 lakh. We laid a trap in Wakad and took the six women, along with the baby boy, into custody on Friday evening,” he said.
The police sub-inspector said it was revealed during the questioning of the suspects that one of the six arrested women was the mother of the baby boy. "The woman, a daily wage worker, told us that she had agreed to sell her son because she was in need of money," he said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteChavan said investigations revealed that the women had sold five babies over the last one year .
They used to identify the needy parents of a newborn, mostly from a poor family background. These women used to offer them money in lieu of their babies.
"These women had sold babies to different people for Rs3 lakh to Rs5 lakh. They used to charge more for a baby boy. All the arrested women have been remanded in police custody till April 16. Our investigations are on," Chavan said.