Ahmedabad: In what is being called the biggest such seizure in recent past, city police’s Special Operations Group (SOG) on Monday seized 2kg mephedrone valued at Rs 2 crore from a Uttar Pradesh trafficker who had arrived in Ahmedabad on a delivery assignment. The man has been identified as Manish Nishad, 28, from Vamoli village in Uttar Pradesh’s Ambedkar Nagar district.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
According to the FIR filed with the Detection of Crime Branch (DCB), police inspector JV Rathod and assistant sub-inspector JB Desai of SOG received a tip-off that a man suspected to be carrying narcotic substance was standing outside Geeta Mandir ST bus stand. Search of the suspect’s bag revealed mephedrone concealed in two plastic bags sealed with tape. 
A forensic expert called to the spot ascertained that the seized substance was mephedrone. According to police, during primary questioning, Nishad said he was a drug trafficker and had brought the consignment on the instructions of a man named Saddam Raees from Bahraich in Uttar Pradesh.
 “Nishad was allegedly paid Rs 5,000 for this trip and was told that he would get a call upon reaching Ahmedabad. He was to deliver the packets only after receiving the call. Nishad has said that he only knew that the consignment was meant for Ahmedabad, but not who was supposed to receive it,” said an officer of the SOG, adding that they would know if a city-based drug mafia was the receiver only after the arrest of Raees, the kingpin in the case. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteThe officer further said that Nishad was unemployed and had been peddling drugs for about a year. Sources in the police have said that this seizure is probably the biggest in recent past. DCB police have registered an FIR under the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (NDPS) Act against Nishad and Raees on a complaint filed by ASI JB Desai.