RANCHI: Human trafficking is an organised crime and has been identified as the fastest growing criminal industry in the world. Human trafficking includes sex trafficking, labour trafficking, trafficking for child labour, organ trafficking and trafficking for illegal adoptions among others. Child trafficking is the exploitation of girls and boys, predominately for forced labour and sexual exploitation.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoSometimes, the children are sold by a family member or an acquaintance or lured by false promises of education and a "better" life. These trafficked and exploited children are held in slave-like conditions without enough food, shelter or clothing and often severely abused and cut off from all contacts with their families.
According to the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB), 2021, data, Jharkhand registered 188 such cases. The state also ranks first in the country in rate of conviction in cases at 84.2% out of the 92 cases that were tried in 2021. In post-pandemic era coupled with the erratic nature of monsoon and other climatic impacts when many adults had to migrate from their rural base in search of livelihood, children are often left behind with elderly members at home, thereby, enhancing their vulnerability to be either kidnapped or trafficked to bigger cities for various reasons. It can be perceived that these vulnerabilities would be a breeding ground for the traffickers and would further increase the risk of children falling prey to them. 
The NFHS 5 (2020-21) data reflects that more than 32.2% women in the age-group of 20-24 years were married before they attain 18 years of age. A further segregation of data reveals that the number of child marriages in the rural areas is much higher than in urban areas. The reasons of child marriages in the state can primarily be attributed to the lack of access to higher education for girls, poverty, social and gender stereotypes and weak enforcement of the law. 
Engaging students with education is essential at this juncture, especially in government-run schools. Moreover, the two consecutive years of school closure due to the pandemic has had a huge impact on children, especially in their learning abilities. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe greatest challenge confronting policy makers is that information about the magnitude of the problem is limited. Due to the lack of official, evidence-based estimates of the scale, magnitude and dimensions of child trafficking, the process of an appropriate policy responses are incomplete. 
The state government has come up with plans to combat trafficking that included an action plan to prevent child marriages, and anti-human trafficking units are also working in each district.
(The writer is the state head, Jharkhand state project office of the Bal Raksha Bharat)