KOLKATA: The Calcutta High Court has asked the CID’s Anti Human Trafficking Unit (AHTU) to probe what happened to a woman who went missing 18 years ago when she was waiting for a train to Park Circus from Santoshpur for work. 
The police probe indicated that she had been kidnapped for murder and seven persons were arrested. The middle-aged victim, Kamala Devi, is still missing since June 17, 2006.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Justice Shampa Dutt (Paul) in a July 20 order asked the CID to start reinvestigation in a week. Dutt said, “The CID, AHTU, shall submit a report on investigation before the trial court within six months of taking up the investigation, leaving no stone unturned to recover the victim lady missing for the last 18 years.” The judge also said, “It is heartening to see that the petitioner has till date not lost faith in the system and a proper closure is what the petitioner needs.”
Ram Suresh Kahar, Kamala’s husband, has been running from police stations to court for the last 18 years, seeking to know how his wife went missing. The case has been probed twice by the Ballygunge GRPS. The probe reports have been submitted twice in court, the first in 2010, and the second in 2018. The South 24 Parganas SP had also filed a report in court. Despite the police saying in court that the woman had been abducted for murder, and several people were involved in the criminal conspiracy, the repeated investigations faltered at a crucial point — what happened to Kamala after she was abducted. Cops said the seven people who were arrested in connection with the case had a role in abducting Kamala but stayed mum on what they did with the victim. Kamal’s phone had been seized by the police, but the call records, cops claimed, left no clue. Kahar’s lawyer Souvik Mitter told the HC that if Kamala was not traced, there would be none to depose in court on what happened to her, frustrating the trial. Mitter wanted a probe by either CID or CBI, to plug the gaps by the police’s slipshod probe. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreIn 2018, a trial court, which was hearing this case, also said that since Kamala remained untraceable and without a “definite conclusion as to what actually happened to her, the entire trial shall be frustrated if cognizance is taken on the basis of such a charge sheet that has been submitted based on perfunctory and lackadaisical investigation.” Cops said they had gone to Uttar Pradesh where Kamala used to live before her marriage.