PANAJI: Goa police on Saturday busted an international sex trafficking racket, which targeted economically weak women and single mothers from Uganda and allegedly forced them into the sex trade. Goa police have arrested one person and rescued two women. Police said the women were lured with the promise of good jobs.
The racket was busted by Mandrem police with assistance from Arz, the nodal NGO for curbing sex trafficking.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
“The women are falsely promised jobs at restaurants and cafes in Goa,” North Goa SP Akshat Kaushal said. “After the women are brought to India, their passports are seized by the traffickers, who force the women into prostitution under the threat of violence.”
One of the women who was rescued had been brought to India three months ago on a tourist visa. Initially, she was housed in Mumbai and then moved to Goa.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndo“Agents in Uganda are using the women who have returned from India to identify young and vulnerable targets,” a police officer said. “When the Ugandan women are tricked into coming to India, the prospect of being harmed and a debt burden of Rs 6 lakh are used to coerce them into prostitution.”
DySP Jivba Dalvi said the racket was run by a close-knit group involving a Ugandan trafficker, Jojo Nakintu. “It chiefly operated online, leveraging the escort websites to solicit clients,” he said. “The beach and roads at Arambol were also used to draw in clients.”
Nakintu, 31, has been arrested, Kaushal said. “An FIR has been registered under Section 370 (human trafficking) of the IPC and Sections 4, 5, 7 of the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act,” he added.
Police said that one of the women contacted the Ugandan embassy and with help from the embassy, Goa cops were able to locate the victims.
Mandrem PI Sherif Jaques and Arz members went in search of the victims. The rescued women have been accommodated in the protective home at Merces.
In another case, Mandrem police have arrested a Ugandan woman for overstaying in India. During routine patrolling at Arambol, cops found that Hajarah Nakanwagi, 29, had no valid documents. She has been placed under arrest.