Former President Bill Clinton is set to be named in documents previously redacted, which are related to Jeffrey Epstein, a convicted sex offender. This revelation comes from ABC News. Clinton is among over 150 individuals, previously referred to as John or Jane Does, whose identities will soon be disclosed. The former US president is set to be revealed as "John Doe 36", the report said.PollDo you think Joe Biden will drop out of the US presidential race?YesNo
A federal judge in New York has ordered the unsealing of numerous documents, revealing connections to Epstein. ABC News has indicated that while Clinton is mentioned over 50 times in these filings, there is no evidence of his involvement in illegal activities.
The unsealing of these documents, which will reveal the identities of more than 170 people previously known only as John and Jane Does, was ordered by Manhattan federal Judge Loretta Preska just before Christmas. The release is expected to start on January 2, following the New Year’s Day holiday.
The documents will reveal names of various associates, victims, investigators, and journalists involved in the case. However, some names, including those of minor victims and a person mistakenly identified as a perpetrator, will remain sealed. One individual has requested her name be withheld to avoid potential physical harm.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreThis development is part of a 2015 lawsuit between Epstein accuser Virginia Giuffre and Ghislaine Maxwell, Epstein's former lover and accomplice. The case was settled in 2017, but the judge had indicated in hearings in 2021 and 2022 that the names would not remain sealed indefinitely. Giuffre has accused Epstein and Maxwell of trafficking her when she was 17.
Clinton, known to have associated with Epstein and photographed with him, has denied any nefarious connections with the sex offender. He has also declined to testify in Giuffre's lawsuit, claiming he never visited Epstein’s private Caribbean Island, Little St James, a claim supported by flight records.
Epstein, who had previously been convicted of sex offenses in Florida, died in the Metropolitan Correctional Center in New York in 2019 while awaiting trial for sex trafficking. His death was ruled a suicide, and a federal investigation upheld this conclusion, despite identifying issues with the Bureau of Prisons and its staff.