JALANDHAR: Jalandhar Rural Police in Punjab on Thursday arrested a major drug trafficker.
Malkiat Singh alias Kali — according to Punjab DGP Gaurav Yadav — had sent three swimmers to fetch a consignment of 50 kg heroin from Pakistan.
“Police teams have also seized nine kg heroin — a portion of the 50 kg heroin consignment — from his possession,” said the DGP in Chandigarh, adding that 22.5 kg of the heroin had already been recovered by the Punjab police taking the total recovery to 31.5 kg.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
“The development came in less than a month after the Jalandhar Rural Police had arrested drug smuggler Joga Singh, who swam into the Pakistan jurisdiction to retrieve the heroin consignment and eight kg heroin was recovered from him. Earlier, the State Special Operation cell (SSOC) in Amritsar had arrested a drug smuggler, identified as Shinder Singh, after recovering 10 kg heroin and Rs 1.5 lakh drug money from his possession,” he said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndo“A woman drug smuggler, identified as Amandeep Kaur alias Deep Bhai, linked to this module was also arrested with one kg heroin, while, another drug smuggler, Shinderpal alias Pappu, was arrested with 500 grams heroin from Mehatpur,” the DGP said.
While terming the recovery of this big haul of heroin a result of rigorous follow-up investigations by the Punjab police, DGP Yadav said that following forward and backwards linkages in this case, Jalandhar Rural Police arrested the accused drug trafficker Malkiat Kali, a resident of Tendi Wala village in Ferozepur, from near Boparai Canal Bridge near Goraya and recovered the heroin kept in his shoulder bag.
Divulging details, Jalandhar Rural SSP Mukhwinder Singh Bhullar said that the accused revealed that he was in regular touch with a Pakistan-based drug smuggler, identified as Haider Ali, who helped him in smuggling the heroin consignments to India in lieu of hawala transactions.
Malkiat Kali also revealed that he had sent Joga Singh along with two more persons to Pakistan using a riverine route to fetch the 50-kg heroin consignment, which was equally distributed between his party and Joga Singh’s party,” he said. 
Further investigations are on and police teams are on manhunt to arrest remaining drug smugglers involved in this module.
A fresh case was registered on Thursday under Section 21C of the NDPS Act at Goraya police station.