RAIPUR: Another minor girl from Chhattisgarh has become victimized to human trafficking net when a social media acquaintance raped her on pretext of getting her a job in Indian Army and he then sent her to Rajasthan where he “sold” her off for Rs 3 lakh for marriage.
The 17-year-old girl was subjected to repeated cycles of rape and torture in a forced marriage for months, until she found an opportunity to make a distress call to her worried parents in November, 2022, followed by her rescue.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
The incident dates back to January 23, 2023 when the distraught parents reported their daughter missing in Dongargarh police station of Rajnandgaon, about 110 kilometers from state capital.
Speaking to TOI, Mohit Garg, Rajnandgaon superintendent of police said that a search was launched to find the girl and investigations were underway.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA Institute“It was recently in November when the parents approached police saying that the girl called them telling them that she was ‘somewhere’ in Rajasthan and was in a bad state. She told her parents that she was being thrashed badly and her ear drum was damaged. The police team immediately traced the location of the call and sent a team to Churu in Rajasthan, two days after Diwali that is on November 14, 2023,” SP Garg said.
The girl was rescued from a house and one Sukhram,22, was arrested from the spot who held the survivor hostage. Police have recently arrested the main accused Premaram Godara, 30, who had trapped the girl via a social media account who faked about his army background and lured the girl for job. He had posted his own pictures in Army uniform and claimed he runs an army academy.
The minor in her statement to police said that she fled home with Premaram on December 4, 2022 to “join forces” in Bhopal where he made intimate contacts with her. He brought into the picture his friend Kailash from Rajasthan and introduced him as the man for recruitment.
The survivor told police that Premaram handed her over to Kailash and his three relatives Sukhram Thuger, his brother and father who took her in a car to Churu in Rajasthan.
They bought her from Premaram at the cost of Rs 3 lakh.
As the girl doesn’t come from a well-to-do family, she still hoped to get some money from a job but to her shock, she was made to live like a “partner” with Sukhram who would rape her whenever he wanted and torture, beat her if she resisted or expressed wish to return home.
She somehow was able to grab a phone to call her parents, else, the torment would have continued, she stated.
SP Garg said that since she was rescued, police teams had gone to Rajasthan twice in past three months and finally got hold of Premaram and brought him to Chhattisgarh. During interrogation, Premaram revealed the name of Kailash as his associate. Now, the police are searching for Kailash.
A case was lodged under Section of rape, human trafficking, abduction, and unlawfully marrying by deceit causes under IPC and provisions of POCSO Act.
SP said that police were probing if they have links to an organized trafficking net. He said that the minor survivor comes from an OBC background and there’s a provision for compensation of Rs 20,000 and Rs 1.75 lakh, which she will be given soon.
Recently, on December 5, TOI reported a similar case of a tribal minor girl from Kabirdham who returned home after five years of captivity, forced marriage and repeated rape by ‘husband and his father’, when she was sold off as a minor for Rs 2 lakh by her relative. She also had a two-year-old son whose custody is with the accused yet to be arrested.