Ranchi: A Simdega woman’s search for her missing younger sister helped police and child activists rescue a young woman and four girls forced into sex trade at a highway eatery under the Kosi Kalan police station in Mathura in Uttar Pradesh early this week.
Earlier this month, Rashmi Munda (named changed), who was working in Goa approached the child welfare committee (CWC), Delhi seeking help to trace and rescue her minor sister missing since last two months.She approached the CWC after her sister called her from an unknown number. “I was told that she was stuck somewhere in Delhi. So, I contacted CWC Delhi for help. I got the number from my sister-in-law who was once trafficked and employed as a domestic help in Delhi and was later rescued by the CWC Delhi,” said Rashmi.

Soon, CWC members swung into action and sent a letter to Mission Mukti Foundation (MMF) on October 8 to trace the girl. Talking to TOI, MMF director Virendra Kumar Singh said, “After working on initial inputs, we learnt that the victim was forced into prostitution at a hotel in Kosi (Mathura). Our team did a recce but she wasn’t found there. We learnt about another hotel nearby but that input too turned out to be false. However, our team stayed put in the area posing as clients to hire call girls. Soon, one of the guards at the second hotel took money from us and led us to highway eateries with his reference for call girls.”
“At one of the highway dhabas (eateries), we were shown some girls but we couldn’t find Rashmi’s sister. Then, we visited Chaudhary Dhaba where we were shown the girl we were looking for. Police soon raided the dhaba and rescued Rashmi’s sister along with four others,” he said.
Singh said a total of five including four minors were rescued with the help of the complainant who also accompanied the rescue team. “Three minors are from Simdega, one from West Bengal and a woman is from Delhi. All are with CWC in Mathura undergoing counselling,” he said, adding the entire operation ended on October 11 night. “NCPCR and UP’s SCPCR including local police cooperated in this operation,” he said Jharkhand State Commission for Protection Of Child Rights member Sunil Verma said, “We have received information about the rescue of three girls from Simdega. In a day or two, we will send a team for their safe return to the state. Then we will work on their rehabilitation.”