Pallabi seeks increased vigilance at railway stations which are susceptible to trafficking of girl children
Known to support humanitarian causes regularly, actor Richa Chadha is extending her full support to Nguvu Change Leader Pallabi Ghosh who has so far saved over 10,000 girls from human trafficking and is amplifying her demand for stringent vigilance by the Railway Protection Force at railway stations.It is in this mass transportation system, where most cases of rampant human trafficking are reported.
Richa expressed her unwavering commitment to Pallabi’s efforts via her Instagram, mentioning that it is the moral responsibility of every one of us to combat child trafficking. In her Instagram post today, she highlighted Pallabi’s call to action and commitment to safeguard India’s human capital and put an end to trafficking. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteRicha wrote on her Instagram: "This #HumanRightsDay, I stand with Nguvu Change Leader Pallabi Ghosh, a tireless advocate against human trafficking in India. Pallabi is calling for increased vigilance at railway stations, empower staff, and strengthen coordination against this heinous crime, which oftentimes takes place within hustle-bustle of busy railway stations around the country. Through awareness, we can unite to safeguard India's human capital and put an end to trafficking. @nguvu_collective #EndHumanTrafficking #NguvuCollective
Pallabi Ghosh says, “Actor Richa Chadha's support to my campaign gives me immense hope that when powerful voices come together, we can eliminate human trafficking." She adds, "We can significantly mitigate child trafficking through Increased vigilance at railway stations. However, this requires a strong will and a coordinated effort from the entire railway ecosystem - Travelling Ticket Examiners (TTEs) and other railway staff, the police, railway police, and the general public."
Pallabi has also launched an online petition, urging the Director General of the Railway Protection Force, and the Union Government to create a framework that will strengthen vigilance at railway stations. She also contributes to the rehabilitation and empowerment of survivors through her Impact and Dialogue Foundation, focusing on skill-building and community support initiatives.
Celebrating Indian cinema: Richa Chadha, Ali Fazal, Shabana Azmi, Imtiaz Ali attend an event in Mumbai