Nagpur: In a major action, five persons from Gujarat were arrested near Dongargaon between Kohmara and Deori (NH6) in Gondia district on Tuesday night for trafficking five adult common cranes from West Bengal to Mumbai.
The tall birds were kept in an SUV’s rear seats which were folded to accommodate the birds. The two vehicles of the accused were intercepted by PSI Dineshkumar Lilhare and two constables of the highway police centre, Dongargaon.
The accused have been identified as Samir Shakir Mansuri (29), Hajuruddin Maulavi (25), Musa Sheikh (24), Shahzad Sheikh Shakil (29) and Pathan Hussain Gulam Sabir (19), all residents of Bhindi Bazaar, Surat (Gujarat).PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoAll of them have been remanded to forest custody (FCR) till September 16. 
Though the accused are from Gujarat and their vehicles were also registered there, they travelled nearly 1,100km from Kolkata to Dongargaon before being caught midway. The accused claimed the birds were handed over to them by some people in Kolkata to be delivered on Mohammed Ali Road, Mumbai.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More“The case is not a simple case as it looks and has wider ramifications. The accused must be frequent travellers between West Bengal and Mumbai. They must be regulars in the trade and in-depth investigation is needed. Trafficking of more birds cannot be ruled out in the past,” said Sawan Bahekar, honorary wildlife warden of Gondia.
Common cranes (Grus grus) are migratory in the region and are listed under Schedule I of the amended Wildlife Protection Act (WPA), 1972. Hunting, transporting or trading them invites an equal amount of punishment like tigers and leopards. These birds were also ringed.
The Navegaon-Nagzira Tiger Reserve (NNTR) field director Jayarame Gowda R, who is also holding additional charge of the Gondia forest division, said the accused were illegally transporting the cranes. “As the condition of the birds was bad, we shifted them to Gorewada rescue centre at Nagpur for treatment. All the accused have been detained and are being interrogated for their further links in the case,” Gowda said.
According to forest sources, this was the third trip of the accused. The birds are ringed indicating a wider angle to the racket. The police also found some visiting cards for hotels in Saudi Arabia.