AHMEDABAD: Investigation into the human trafficking racket by Kanbha police has revealed that the accused used “vastu (object)” as the code word for the minor girls they wanted to sell off as a brides.
Sources in Ahmedabad Rural police who are privy to the investigation said that the entire case was the result of a skewed sex ratio. 

“Men of the communities with skewed sex ratio were the buyers and the minor girls from the downtrodden communities, like tribal and Dalit, were the victims.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThey were targeted by the human traffickers,” said a police officer.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe traffickers used to roam about in different areas to identify vulnerable girls, and lure and abduct them, before selling them off as “brides”. 
Once sold to the men, these minor girls used to run away from their homes with cash and valuables, as instructed by the kingpin Ashok Patel, 42, from the Odhav area of the city, sources said.
This modus operandi came to light during the investigation into the case of a missing minor girl by the Kanbha police. 
The police have arrested seven persons — Ashok Patel, his wife Renuka, their minor son, Patel family’s accomplice Rupal Mekwan from Odhav; two from Palanpur in Banaskantha — Amrat Thakor and Cheharsinh Solanki — and a man from Mansa named Moti Senma — on May 18.
During the remand of the accused persons, it was found that Ashok had sent Mekwan as a bride to a man in Kanbha.
“At that time, he identified a minor girl, 13, and with Mekwan’s help, they abducted her on May 11. Before that, on May 10, Ashok called up Solanki to fix a deal with a man in Rajasthan and arrange a safe place in Siddhpur where the girl was supposed to be confined. So, even before this 13-year-old girl from Kanbha was abducted, it was decided that she would be sold. In the entire conversation, Ashok and Solanki used the word ‘vastu’ (object) for a girl,” said a police officer.
However, Solanki and Ashok could not contact each other after abducting the girl and she was kept in Boru village of Mansa from where she was rescued.