PANAJI: The rescue of two more Kenyan girls who were victims of an international sex racket operated in Goa and the investigation by the ED and Goa police has revealed that the Kenyan sex trafficking racket is spread across the country and Goa is the epicentre.
Arz (Anyay Rahit Zindagi), the nodal NGO appointed by Goa police’s anti-human trafficking unit, said that there the investigation should be handed over to the National Investigation Agency (NIA) to further investigate the international sex racket operated from Kenya.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
“We believe that the rescue of eight girls by police from Anjuna is only the tip of the iceberg. A proper investigation of the sex trafficking racket by the NIA will lead to the rescue of many more girls from different parts of India,” Arz said.
Arun Pandey of Arz said that to combat sex trafficking of African girls in India, it is important that the NIA should investigate the Kenya trafficking case. “The ED investigation has established that the Kenya sex trafficking case registered at the Anjuna police station is spread all across India and Goa is only the epicentre,” Pandey said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreDuring the ED’s investigation, it was established that crores of money generated from sex trafficking of African girls has been transacted through hawala. The ED investigation led to two more girls being rescued by police from Anjuna on Wednesday.
“Arz believes that there are many more girls from that African country who are victims of this organised network and are being exploited in different cities of India. It is the NIA which has a special anti-trafficking cell, which should take over the case and investigation, it is only then that all the girls will get rescued and those involved in this racket, whether in India and outside will be arrested,” Pandey said.
TOI had reported that Goa police had busted this sex racket in early September.
Anjuna PI Prashal Dessai had said that the traffickers ran a website, ‘Massage Republic’, to contact customers. “After the deal was struck between the customer and traffickers, the customer would come to meet the victim. Before moving ahead, the victim had to share a QR code with the customers. Once the payment was done, the entire sum of money was transferred to the account of the traffickers,” he had said.