Gurgaon: Their passports seized and movement restricted to two floors of a 21-storey building in coastal Cambodia, they couldn’t just up and quit. Any disobedience in following orders was punished with torture.
“Cellphones were banned in office, and they would give us electric shocks with tasers or batons if we failed to execute online frauds,” Sanjeet Yadav told TOI on Tuesday.


    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteThe 25-year-old is among hundreds of Indians who left their hometowns after being promised jobs abroad with decent salaries but ended up trapped and forced to work in cybercrime factories in Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam.
 Accounts of those rescued, including Sanjeet’s, show how these “call centres” were organised cybercrime operations that drew their manpower from youngsters looking for foreign jobs. Other than Indians, there were “co-workers” from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Nepal. 
Sanjeet, who belongs to Gopalganj in Bihar, said he had completed his certification course in fire safety when he got in touch with Prahlad Singh, owner of MK Training Centre in his hometown. 
Convinced that he would be a fire safety supervisor for a firm in Cambodia, Sanjeet said he paid Rs 1.4 lakh to Prahlad. He took a flight from Kolkata to Phnom Penh in Vietnam on August 24, 2023, along with three other men from UP and Bihar. 
“We were received by a cab driver at the airport on the instructions of an agent, Anand Kumar Singh. The cab dropped us at the Vietnam-Cambodia border, where another agent took our passports and got visas for Cambodia. We were then taken back to Phnom Penh and handed over to someone named Maddy, a Pakistani citizen. More people like me were there,” Sanjeet said.
Maddy arranged for three cabs for all the jobseekers to reach Sihanoukville, a coastal Cambodian city, Sanjeet said. They were supposed to work for a company, Dexi Gang, allegedly owned by a Chinese citizen.
Sanjeet along with 100-odd men — none of whom had access to their passports — started working in a 21-storey building there. Teams of ten were allotted cubicles, each trained and assigned a specific online fraud, on the topmost floor. All of them lived in small rooms on the floor below. 
“They trained us on how to execute crypto investment frauds. Instructions were given on how to respond to each reply from the target… I was in the crypto investment fraud team… I told my manager I did not want to work. He told me to pay back $2,000 that they had paid to my agent. They told me they won’t return my passports,” Sanjeet said.
 The 25-year-old managed to call Prahlad but didn’t get any help. After almost three weeks of working for Dexi Gang, Sanjeet was shifted to another company, DB Casino, in the same city.
 There, he managed to send an e-mail to the Indian embassy, which helped rescue him and fly him back to Kolkata in Dec 2023. He is now working as a fire safety technician in Noida.
 It was on Sanjeet’s complaint that Prahlad was arrested by police on Monday. But the arrest was part of a crackdown that saw the National Investigation Agency (NIA) carry out joint searches with police and arrest five men across states.
In Gurgaon, ‘influencer’ Bobby Kataria was among the five held for human trafficking and abduction. Like Prahlad’s company, Kataria’s firm MBK Global Consultancy allegedly promised a job to Arun Kumar of UP but left him in a call centre in Laos. The influencer was sent to three-day police custody on Tuesday. “We will find out if Bobby Kataria had sent more people to Laos to work for international cybercrime gangs,” a Gurgaon police officer said.
 Another arrest — of Manish Hingu in Vadodara, Gujarat — was made after Dinabandhu Sahu was rescued.
Similar to Sanjeet's path, Dinabandhu left Ganjam in Odisha and went to Kolkata, where he took the flight to Vietnam and ended up in Cambodia in July 2023 after getting in touch with Hingu’s firm, Unique Employment Services.
 Offered a job as a computer operator, he too paid Manish Hingu and an associate Krishna Pathak Rs 1.5 lakh.
“At the unnamed company in Poipet (Cambodia), I was trained to do crypto currency frauds. When I refused to do so, they locked me up in a room and demanded $2,820 to let me go. I lived in Cambodia for 34 days before leaving for India with the help of the embassy,” Dinabandhu said. He now works for a private firm in Berhampur.
 In its statement after the searches on Monday, NIA said that the five accused were found to have been “involved in an organised trafficking syndicate engaged in luring and trafficking Indian youth to foreign countries on the false promises of legal employment.”
MEA this month issued an advisory, asking people not to take up job opportunities in Laos and Cambodia without thorough background checks of agents.
 A group of 20 Indian workers earlier this week sought help from MEA, saying in two videos that surfaced online that they were promised jobs in Thailand but were “enslaved” in military-controlled Myanmar.