HYDERABAD: Investigation into the sale of an infant in Hyderabad recently blew the lid off an inter-state child trafficking racket, leading to the arrest of eight persons on Tuesday and rescue of 11 children - aged between 23 days and three years - from different parts of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh.
The operation was conducted by Rachakonda police after three persons, who were part of the racket, were arrested earlier this month.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo

According to police, the children were trafficked through 'suppliers' operating out of Delhi and Pune, and sold to childless couples in the two Telugu states. So far, the gang has trafficked more than 50 children and sold them for up to Rs 6 lakh.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoA hunt is still on for the 'suppliers', said Rachakonda police, adding that they were yet to ascertain how these children entered this illegal market.
"All the rescued children are in good health. Five more trafficked children have been located in Vijayawada, and we are in the process of rescuing them as well," said Tarun Joshi, police commissioner of Rachakonda.
Of the 16 kids rescued, four are boys and the rest are girls. Police handed over the children to the state woman and child development department. They will be kept at govt child care homes. 
Gang in city offers help to couples for a handsome pay
Cops said the Hyderabadbased operators of the racket approached childless couples and offered to help them for a handsome amount. 
“Once the deal was struck, the suppliers in Delhi and Pune were contacted. They shared the photographs of the children through WhatsApp with the city-based gang, which in turn, forwarded the pictures to the couples, asking to pick from it. Once the full payment was made, the local agents would travel to Delhi or Pune, and bring the children through various means of transport,” said a cop. 
The case first came to light on May 22, when police arrested a registered medical practitioner, Shobha Rani, and her two associates from Peerzadiguda, while they were trying to sell a baby girl to a childless couple.
Investigations into Shoba Rani’s activities led the police officers to other accused operating from Ghatkesar and Vijayawada. Based on their confessions, police tracked down the couples who had bought the trafficked children.
 While the 11 accused arrested so far have been booked under IPC sections 370 (trafficking), 372 and 373 (prohibiting sale, hiring buying, or obtaining possession of children for unlawful and immoral activities), along with provisions of the Juvenile Justice Act, police officer are yet to take any legal action against the couples.