Gurgaon: Bodybuilder and ‘influencer’ Bobby alias Balwant Kataria, arrested for trafficking people after promising to get them stable work in foreign countries, has confessed to sending 33 job seekers abroad through his consultancy over the past year, police said on Friday.
Of the 33 clients, 12 were allegedly sent to Laos, 12 to Armenia, four to Thailand, two to Singapore and three to Canada. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo

“Of the 12 who were sent to Laos, five managed to return home and seven are still there. We suspect they were coerced into working for international cybercrime gangs. We are gathering more information,” ACP (crime) Varun Dahiya said.
Kataria was arrested on May 27 after a joint operation with police and the National Investigation Agency (NIA).
They were acting on a complaint by UP job aspirant Arun Kumar who was among hundreds of Indians rescued from Laos by the Union ministry of external affairs. Kumar alleged that Kataria had promised to get him a job in the UAE. But he was allegedly sent to Laos, from where he was forced to work at a call centre run by a Chinese citizen and forced to carry out cybercrimes targeting foreigners. Kumar said he had paid Kataria’s firm – MBK Global Consultancy, which has an outlet in Sector 109 of Gurgaon -- Rs 1.5 lakh.
Apart from Kataria, four others were held across states after searches by NIA and local police.
NIA had said in a statement that the accused were allegedly “involved in an organised trafficking syndicate” that sent Indian youngsters to foreign countries on the “false promises” of employment and “forced them to work in fake call centres”.
The searches came after MEA announced earlier this month that 30 Indians were rescued from similar cybercrime factories in Laos in April and May. MEA also advised people not to take up jobs in Laos and Cambodia without thorough background checks of “agents”. 
On Friday, Gurgaon police said Kataria admitted to taking Rs 1.5 lakh to Rs 2.5 lakh from each client. 
It is difficult to trace the whereabouts of all job seekers he sent abroad as he did not maintain proper records of his clients, police officers said.
“But we suspect that the people he sent to Thailand’s Bangkok may have also been diverted to Laos or Cambodia by road to work at cybercrime factories,” a police officer of the Crime Branch said. 
Most of Kataria’s clients are from UP, and few others from Bihar, Rajasthan, Assam and Haryana.
Kataria has lakhs of followers on social media, and he used this platform to get clients for his firm. “He would post advertisements on his social media accounts to get aspirants to contact him,” the ACP said. 
After his arrest, investigators received calls from other job seekers who said they too were cheated by Kataria.
“We will take their complaints and initiate appropriate legal action,” Gurgaon police spokesperson Sandeep Kumar said. 
Cops recovered Rs 20 lakh in cash, seven mobile phones, nine passports of different people and documents from Kataria’s possession. They said he had also opened outlets of his firm in Faridabad (Haryana), Nabha (Punjab) and Sikar (Rajasthan).
Police on Friday advised job aspirants to verify the authenticity of any consultants offering jobs abroad. 
“Before getting a visa to go abroad, get complete information about the agent and take services only from an agent recognised by govt. Fraudulent agents promise jobs or admission in the US, Australia and UAE, but send victims to countries like Mexico, Cuba, Malaysia and Cambodia, where people are forced to work for cybercriminals,” the ACP said.
Kataria, now in judicial custody, has been booked in at least three other cases over the past few years. In 2017, he was accused of extortion by a Gurgaon woman. And in 2022, two cases were registered against him – one for an Instagram video in which he was seen smoking inside a passenger plane, and another for a clip that showed him drinking in the middle of a highway in Dehradun.