KOLKATA: The Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) has not allowed a reference to 'Gujarat' in a Bengali film on widow trafficking in Varanasi starring Trinamool councillor Ananya Banerjee. Two cuts were recommended to ensure that the word 'Hindu' is not used. While one recommendation asked the makers to "delete reference to Hindu", the other recommendation asked them to "delete community reference to Hindu".
This comes six years after CBFC asked to mute the word 'Gujarat' in an Amartya Sen documentary by director Suman Ghosh. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Though TOI tried to get in touch with CBFC's regional officer Sushrut Sharma, he was unavailable for comments. The makers of 'Sada Ronger Prithibi', starring Srabanti Chatterjee, Sauraseni Maitra, Arindam Sil, Rwitobrata Mukherjee, among others, have followed Ghosh's footsteps and have accepted the cut on the word 'Gujarat'. All the other eight cuts have also been accepted to finally receive the censor certificate on Tuesday with an A rating. 
A CBFC source said: "The examining committee spent seven hours going through all the controversial scenes. The cuts were only suggested to ensure that social parity is not damaged when the film is exhibited. He was given the option of approaching the revising committee." 
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteDirector Raajhorshee De told TOI that he reluctantly accepted the cuts and did not approach the revising committee since that would have upset the release plans. But the director is unhappy with the lack of transparency in the proceedings. "I was grilled for five hours on Feb 13 by examining committee members Nilanajan Roy, Keya Ghosh, Rakesh Das and Ayan Banerjee in the presence of Sushrut Sharma. I was surprised when Ghosh, a member of Bengal BJP, asked me why I have shown a character wearing dreadlocks. I had to refer to Bob Marley and Samson Delilah to convince her that there is nothing derogatory in using dreadlocks." 
The Gujarat reference comes when Ananya Banerjee sarcastically discusses what is "unparliamentary" and says: "Karon sob Parliament-er niyom mafik hole deshta Gujarat hoye jeto". The CBFC observation on this dialogue was: "Delete the remarks on a state of the Parliamentary system... if everything was as one-sided and staid as Parliament, the country would have turned into Gujarat". 
The first 'Hindu' dialogue plays out in the scene where Devlina Kumar says: "Maa Baba bollo dwayitwo nebe na. Tokhon hawa ghurchhe janis. Hindu Hindu korchhe sobbai. Shanku-da bollo Kashi chole ja... (My parents shrugged off their responsibility. Back then, the wheel was turning. Everyone was saying Hindu Hindu. Shankuda asked me to go to Kashi...") 
The second 'Hindu' reference is in the dialogue by Sneha Chatterjee when she says: "Power and politics. Setai amader chai. Ki peyechhi Hindu hoye? Tule ene chalan (Power and politics. That's what we want. What have we got by being Hindu? Kidnapped and trafficked)".