New Delhi: Birds and animals were on the agenda of discussion at the CBI headquarters in south Delhi on Thursday. Officials from Interpol, CBI, directorate of revenue intelligence and domain experts from India, Bangladesh, Malaysia, Indonesia and Thailand had assembled at the agency’s headquarters for an international meet aimed at discussing trafficking of exotic wild species, transnational poaching networks and smuggling routes. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
CBI director Praveen Sood said that trafficking of exotic wild species posed a grave threat and that enhanced international cooperation and information sharing among law enforcement agencies was the need of the hour.
Highlighting that all the participating countries were home to rich biodiversity, including rare and endangered species that are targeted by transnational poaching and smuggling networks, he deliberated on protection of exotic species through a combination of legal frameworks, enforcement mechanisms, international cooperation and community involvement.
Hyuk Lee, criminal intelligence officer from the environmental security unit of Interpol, detailed the need to better understand trafficking routes and modus operandi. He asserted on dismantling the illicit supply chains that sustained this illegal trade.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreIn a statement, CBI spokesperson RC Joshi said that Interpol and CBI were jointly hosting the two-day regional investigative and analytical case meeting on exotic species trafficking on Feb 22-23. The participants have discussed information gaps and priority targets involved in trafficking transactions.
“The meeting also seeks to enhance utilisation of Interpol channels to combat wildlife crimes. CBI is the National Central Bureau for Interpol in India and coordinates with all law enforcement agencies in India for cooperation over Interpol channels,” the spokesperson added.