Sean “Diddy Combs is finally breaking his silence on the raids conducted at two of his properties, amidst an alleged sex trafficking probe.
The rapper, through his lawyer, said in a statement that the searches of his Los Angeles and Miami properties were ”a gross use of military-level force" and that the rapper is “innocent and will continue to fight" to clear his name.
It’s the first public statement from the music mogul’s team since Monday’s raids by heavily armed Homeland Security Investigations agents.

"Yesterday, there was a gross overuse of military-level force as search warrants were executed at Mr Combs' residences," lawyer Aaron Dyer said in a statement to US media.
"This unprecedented ambush -- paired with an advanced, coordinated media presence -- leads to a premature rush to judgment of Mr Combs and is nothing more than a witch hunt based on meritless accusations made in civil lawsuits," said Dyer.
Aerial images taken Monday appeared to show the rapper's sons Justin and King Combs in handcuffs at his Los Angeles property. However, it has been reported that Combs cooperated with authorities, and that neither he nor any family members have been arrested or had their travel restricted.
New images published by celebrity website TMZ on Tuesday appeared to show computers and other electronic equipment had been ripped out from Combs' Los Angeles home.

Authorities have not said why the raids were carried out.
The criminal investigation is a major escalation in the scrutiny of Combs, who has been the defendant in several sexual abuse lawsuits in recent months. He has faced at least four lawsuits from people who say he sexually abused them, with allegations dating back decades.
Last year Combs was sued by former girlfriend Casandra Ventura, who performed under the stage name Cassie and was signed to his Bad Boy label.
The suit alleged he had forced her to perform sexual acts with multiple men over a number of years in cities across the United States.
That suit was settled but was followed by others, including one in December by a woman who accused Combs of sexual assault, alleging he and others gang-raped her when she was 17.
Combs, who has not been criminally convicted, denies all the allegations.
"There has been no finding of criminal or civil liability with any of these allegations. Mr Combs is innocent and will continue to fight every single day to clear his name," said Dyer on Tuesday.
The attorney said there was "no excuse for the excessive show of force and hostility exhibited by authorities," and said neither Combs nor any of his family members were arrested.
The statement did not elaborate on the nature of the investigation. HSI has broad jurisdiction to investigate the illegal movement of people, goods, money, technology and contraband into, out of and throughout the United States, including sex trafficking.
US: Tupac Shakur and Notorious B.I.G. murder cases reopen with recent arrest