Gurgaon: The National Investigation Agency (NIA) has taken over the probe into a human trafficking case involving Gurgaon-based bodybuilder and social media influencer Balwant alias Bobby Kataria, who was arrested by city police last month.
Kataria and others were accused of offering jobs to Indian youngsters abroad and then forcing them into working for cybercons in Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam.
Gurgaon police said on Sunday that the Union home ministry issued directions to transfer the case to NIA. Officials of the central agency collected all related documents over the weekend.
The case came to light after Arun Kumar, a job aspirant from UP’s Gopalganj, was rescued among hundreds of youngsters from Laos and Cambodia with the help of the Indian embassy earlier this year.
In his complaint, Kumar said that he and a friend, Manish, were promised jobs in the UAE and Singapore by Kataria’s firm – MBK Global Consultancy.
The two of them had paid Rs 1.5 lakh and Rs 2 lakh to the firm and received flight tickets to Laos capital Vientiane in March. On landing, Kataria’s associates met them and took them to the Golden Triangle SEZ, part of a trijunction with Myanmar and Thailand.
As their passports had been seized, the two youngsters were forced to work at a call centre along with 150 other Indians, Pakistanis and Bangladeshis.
“A Chinese man operated the call centre and the workers had to call foreigners, mostly Americans, and hoodwink them in digital frauds,” Kumar said in the complaint.
Kataria (38) was arrested on May 27 after a joint operation of police and NIA.
According to Gurgaon police crime branch, Kataria’s firm had sent at least 33 job seekers abroad.
“Twelve of them were sent to Laos and of those, five returned to India. Statements of the other three have been recorded. The remaining 7 are suspected to be in Laos,” a crime branch officer said. The others were sent to Armenia, Thailand, Canada and Singapore over the past year.
Kataria had opened outlets of his consultancy in Gurgaon and Faridabad (Haryana), Sikar (Rakasthan) and Nabha (Punjab). 
NIA earlier this month re-registered the Kataria case under sections 120-B (criminal conspiracy), 323 (voluntarily causing hurt), 342 (punishment for wrongful confinement), 346 (wrongful confinement in secret), 364 (kidnapping or abducting in order to murder), 370 (trafficking of persons), 420 (cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property) and 506 (criminal intimidation) of the IPC.
The agency also invoked sections 10 (no person to function as recruiting agent without a valid certificate) and 24 (offences and penalties) of The Emigration Act.
To officially transfer the probe, NIA had moved a petition before a city court to get case files. Judicial magistrate (first class) Nidhi Beniwal on June 15 issued the order, allowing Kataria to be produced before NIA special court in Panchkula on June 28.