THANE: An infant abducted from Madhya Pradesh and bought by a schoolteacher from Kalyan was rescued and reunited with his parents on Friday. The schoolteacher and five others have been arrested. Two of the arrested persons are women. Also, four other people have been arrested by the Madhya Pradesh police.
The 6-month-old boy had been kidnapped from Rewa district early on Tuesday.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe child was asleep on a footpath beside his parents in the Civil Lines locality when two people reached the spot on a motorcycle and picked up the infant. The parents woke up on hearing the baby's cries and tried to stop the two from taking the baby but they escaped on the two-wheeler. 
The schoolteacher, Shrikrishna Patil, 53, wanted to bring home a child, said officials of Khadakpada police station. The others who have been arrested have been identified as Amul Yerunkar, 34, his wife RV Yerunkar,32, Nitin Soni,26, Swati Soni,24 and Pradeep Kolambe, 35.
Rewa district police who are investigating caught four persons after checking footage from at least 250 CCTV cameras. After interrogating them, the police learnt that they had handed the child over to Nitin Soni, 26 and his wife Swati Soni alias Mehak Khan, 24, from Kalyan.
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreDCP Sachin Gunjal of Thane police said, "As soon as Rewa police informed Khadakpada police station, we immediately started searching for the accused. We first caught Nitin Soni and his wife Swati ," he said.
On investigation, it was found that the two had been contacted by an autorickshaw driver named Pradeep Kolambe to steal the child, after which the police caught Kolambe. But the police investigation did not stop here and on investigation with Kolambe, it was found that Amul Yerunkar, who works as an attendant at a known hospital in Mumbai and his wife RV Yerunkar who works for a shares trading company had asked him to lift the child. In return, the Soni couple had paid them Rs 4 lakh. 
Assistant commissioner of police Kalyanji Ghete said that when their team led by Anil Gaikwad interrogated the Yerunkar couple, they revealed that they had sold the child to the teacher Shrikrishna Patil, who had taken him home in Raigad district. A police team left for the spot and caught the teacher at Panvel while he was on his way to the village. The police recovered the child from him. 
The police learnt that the teacher had no children and had asked Amul, his student, to inform if there was any child for adoption. Amul had taken Rs 29 lakh from Patil.