PANAJI: For the first time in over two decades, the government protective home for victims of sex trafficking has no inmates. Only 18 women have been rescued this year, a sharp dip from the 80-100 average from around 6-8 years ago.
From the 18 rescued this year, eight were "self-rescued", said Arun Pandey of Arz, Goa police's nodal agency. "The victims called the police helpline and Arz for assistance."
The government protective home was established under Section 21 of the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Pandey said that the Supreme Court, in a 2022 case, used the term 'sex worker' in an interim direction.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More'Trafficking is a result of multiple factors, some beyond control of law enforcement'
This, he said, gave the impression that prostitution is legalised, and it has been noticed that the number of rescues by Goa police has dropped.
Arz is one of the anti-trafficking NGOs in India that, under the aegis of Anti-Human Trafficking Forum, wrote to the chief justice of India requesting the Supreme Court to reconsider the use of the term 'sex worker' in the glossary of terms mentioned in the 'Handbook on combating gender stereotypes', published by the top court in August.
"The SC, based on the suggestions, changed the nomenclature/word 'sex worker' in the handbook on combating gender stereotypes to 'trafficked victim'/'survivor or woman engaged in commercial sexual activity' or 'woman forced into commercial sexual exploitation'," he said. "The change in the terminology of 'sex worker' will result in an increase in the number of sex trafficking victims rescued in Goa during the tourist season, when trafficking is high."
Pandey said that most victims were rescued during the Covid pandemic, when travel restrictions were in place. "Trafficking is a result of multiple factors, some of them beyond the control of law enforcement agencies, as it is the responsibility of the source and transit state," he said.
"There is an increase in sex trafficking by air," he added. The National Commission for Women (NCW) and the Central Industrial Security Force have taken proactive steps to conduct training programmes for CISF personnel across India to control trafficking." Pandey is a resource person for the NCW.