JAIPUR: Prime Minister Narendra Modi engaged with the police chief of each state on the second day of the 58th national conference of director generals and inspector generals of police in Jaipur on Saturday.
The annual three-day conference, being held at the Rajasthan International Centre on January 5-7, saw marathon discussions on four key topics - cybersecurity, internal security, legal reforms and human trafficking.Sources said the PM arrived at the venue shortly after 8:30 am and left after 8 pm, following a detailed discussion on a range of subjects.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoHe also addressed the DGPs and motivated them to keep working for the security of the country.
Union home minister Amit Shah and national security advisor Ajit Doval also attended the conference.
On Saturday, cybersecurity took the centre stage at the conference for about three hours, featuring the participation of prominent cyber experts and teams from across the country. PM Modi received a detailed briefing on the ongoing efforts in the field of cybersecurity.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteAt 1 pm, PM Modi and Amit Shah shared a luncheon with all the DGPs and IGPs. During the hour-long lunch break, Modi personally interacted with each officer and exchanged ideas. According to the sources, the Taj Group catered the lunch, with a special emphasis on showcasing the flavours of Rajasthani cuisine.Suggestions were actively sought from the DGPs of all states to address the issue of internal security. Doval shared insightful perspectives during a comprehensive session.
Discussions were held for about four hours on the necessity of changing laws and increasing punishments and fines. Shah and the police chiefs of various states presented their views on this critical subject.
A two-hour session was dedicated to deliberations on human trafficking. Minister of state for home Nityanand Rai made an informative presentation on the subject, followed by an in-depth discussion on its root causes and preventive measures.
Sources said as many as 11 sessions were held on multiple subjects during the day. The DGPs and chiefs of different police agencies also shared critical information during the conference.
Meanwhile, police took swift action, placing NSUI state president Abhishek Chaudhary under house arrest, for threatening to show black flags to PM Modi. Other members of the student organisation were also detained. "The authorities maintained a strict vigil to ensure the smooth proceedings of the conference," said a senior police officer.