JIND: The Jind police on Thursday booked a person from Nepal for kidnapping and trafficking a minor girl to India. The Safidon police of Jind district in Haryana booked the accused on the basis of a complaint lodged by the victim's father (50) alleging that the accused identified as Hasina kidnapped her daughter and brought to India for sale on December 16.
PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe police booked the accused under section 370 (trafficking of a person) and started a probe. The accused brought the minor girl on a bus from Nepal to Safidon town of Jind district in Haryana. The case is being investigated. Both the families come from labour background. However, an arrest of the accused is yet to be made, said Ramesh Kumar, an investigation officer (IO). 
Three NGOs involved to rescue the minor girl claimed that it took over four days of intensive search across two countries and the joint efforts to recue the 15-year-old Nepalese girl from a poultry farm in Jind. Working on a tip-off, the three organisations, association for voluntary action, also known as Bachpan Bachao Andolan (BBA); MDD of India, Haryana and DEHAT Uttar Pradesh found that a minor was reported missing from Nepalgunj and was trafficked to Haryana. The NGOs working for child rights in their respective states passed on the info to the police authorities in Haryana’s Safidon and the girl was reunited with her mother in Nepal.
NGO activists claimed that the minor is a class III dropout, wanting to earn money and live a better life. A rickshaw puller named Shiva as well as an elderly lady Haseena had befriended Sameeha a few months ago. When they sensed her desperation to find better opportunities, they convinced her to accompany them to India. Haseena promised her that she would get her a job and a decent salary in a poultry farm in Haryana. Youngest of five siblings and with their father no more, the family’s life was always laced with demands, scarcities and never enough resources. She immediately agreed to accompany them.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreHowever, once they brought her to a farmhouse in Safidon in district Jind in Haryana, she sensed danger. Panicking alone, she somehow managed to call her mother secretly and told her that she was in danger. She even shared her location with her mother on WhatsApp. Sameeha’s mother, who runs a small grocery store on the Indo-Nepal border, had already filed a missing complaint with Nepal police.Her mother panicked for her daughter’s safety and immediately approached an activist working on the Indo-Nepal border. She narrated her daughter’s ordeal to him and shared her location. The activist sensed the urgency of the situation and immediately contacted her colleague Devyani Chaturvedi, executive director, DEHAT, UP and both activists made contact with Jind police SP who ensured an action, Devyani Chaturvedi added.
The police team reached the spot and rescued the girl safely. The girl was produced before the Child Welfare Committee in Jind, Haryana and kept at a shelter home. During her counseling session, she admitted that she came to India without telling her family to earn money. After her counseling and medical examination, she was handed over to her mother and is now the duo on their way back to Nepal.
Talking about the many challenges they face while rescuing child labourers, Manish Sharma, Director, Bachpan Bachao Andolan, said, “Vulnerable children are often trafficked from other states and other countries. Unaware of the dangers, they become easy targets for trafficking, child labour and prostitution. We have been working very hard to free these children from every corner possible but unless the country has strict anti-Trafficking laws and the accused are punished timely and severely, he added.