NEW DELHI: It is no longer just buses and trains, traffickers are increasingly taking the air mode to quickly shift victim girls and women from source to destination states.
The issue took centre stage at a seminar on the problem of human trafficking organised by National Commission for Women and the Central Industrial Security Force in New Delhi on Friday where experts asserted that security personnel at airports have a critical role in combating trafficking by being the eyes and ears on site.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
The CISF is in-charge of security of all commercial airports in India. According to NCW officials, similar seminars with CISF personnel in other states too have been held and there are plans to organise such session with the railways too. “The focus is on stepping up building awareness at points of transit whether it is bus stands, railway stations, airports and sea ports,” an official said.
Asserting that human trafficking is a pressing global concern, NCW chairperson Rekha Sharma highlighted data to say that currently, 27 million individuals worldwide are victims of this menace, with 6-8 lakh people trafficked annually. “This grave issue demands relentless efforts to combat it effectively and therefore workshops like these with CISF are in line with the objective of building awareness,” she added.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreArun Pandey, director, voluntary organisation Anyay Rahit Zindagi (ARZ), cited data to reflect on increase in trafficking through the air mode as he shared insights from their study on trafficking for commercial sexual exploitation based on experiences of 400 girls and women who were rescued between June 2014 to May 2019 in Goa - a prime tourist destination.
The findings show that 84% of these girls were trafficked from 24 states in India and the remaining were from foreign countries that include Nepal, Bangladesh, Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, Turkmenistan, Turkey, Russia and Thailand. In majority of the cases the victims travelled to Goa by flight.
“Some of the key factors making air travel a preferred mode for traffickers are — it is used as a strategy to lure the victim, enables faster movement at short notice and there is less risk of getting caught once onboard a flight unlike in case of long travel in a train or bus. Also at times travelling by air is cheaper based on the timing of the flight. Therefore stepping up vigil on airports is critical and CISF has a big role to play,” Pandey said.
According to the ARZ study, the top two states from where girls came to Goa were Maharashtra and West Bengal followed by Delhi. The NCR was seen to be developing as a source area for Goa at that time and Pandey says their assessment shows that the national Capital continues to be a concern as both a source and transit point that authorities need to focus on to combat trafficking.