Ganganagar and Hanumangarh districts have emerged as a transit hub for narcotics trafficked by drug peddlers from Pakistan across the international border. Narcotics, dropped by Pakistani drones in border areas such as Srikaranpur, Rawla, and Kothi, are intended for buyers in Punjab and Rajasthan.
Despite the efforts of the BSF, intelligence agencies and local police to combat narcotics smuggling facilitated by Pakistani drones, this pressing issue remains largely unaddressed in the election discourse of BJP and Congress candidates in the Ganganagar Lok Sabha constituency, which would go to polls on April 16.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Charan Jeet Singh (60) of Kotha village in Ganganagar said, "This is an emerging problem. We have shops selling sedatives illegally and neither the health department nor the police are acting against these. Political leadership and policy makers should take it seriously else our region will soon have the same drug problem that Punjab has today."
Areas like Karanpur, Sadulshahar, Raisingh Nagar, and Anupgarh, situated near the Pakistan border, are particularly susceptible to narcotics smuggling. "Local residents often retrieve narcotics dropped by Pakistani drones and deliver them to smugglers from Punjab. Efforts to raise awareness against narcotics smuggling are periodically organised, highlighting the potential impact on families in the region," said Ganganagar SP, Gaurav Yadav.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreAccording to the police, at least 20 drug hauls were seized in the past three years and at least 50 persons were arrested. "Majority of the persons arrested were natives of Punjab," Yadav added.
A BSF officer, who was posted at Ganganagar and did not wish to be quoted, said, "This is a new challenge in the area. We are not only guarding the international border but are also gathering inputs to know if any suspicious person or a stranger is coming to the border villagers."
Why the local youth or other people are addicted to drugs in the area is a different story.
"Till 2017, the Rajasthan govt had a policy to give licenses to people who needed poppy husk as it was being used for generations here, especially by farm labourers. When the licences were stopped, the addicts started looking for alternatives. At this point, the Pakistani smugglers started penetrating the area," said Manish Singh, a social activist in Ganganagar. In both Hanumangarh and Ganganagar districts, there are a sizable number of de-addiction centres.