Panaji: Goa police’s investigation into the recent trafficking cases has shown some similarities. While the rescued victims include Nigerian and Nepali girls, probe into their backgrounds showed dysfunctional families, single parent families, domestic violence, addiction, lack of formal education and skills.
Arz (Anyay Rahit Zindagi), the nodal NGO, appointed by Goa police’s anti-human trafficking unit, said that there are similarities between the victims of inter country trafficking — from Kenya to India and Nepal to India.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
“The traffickers have been operating in Bengaluru. The network is spread outside Goa. Lured in the name of employment, the victims are in the 18 to 23 age group. The traffickers are from the same country as the victim. The number of the girls exploited are in double digits. Per girl a trafficker earns Rs 8,000 to Rs 10,000 per client. Traffickers accept digital payment from clients,” Arz said. The victims were being forced and they have rescued themselves, the NGO said.
“In this Nepal to India sex trafficking case, Arz had received a request for intervention from the family members of the victims from Nepal. While we were mobilising intervention, few victims escaped from the custody of the traffickers and contacted us for assistance. We contacted police, who intervened swiftly,” Arun Pandey of Arz said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreThe victims from Nepal are waiting to be reunited with their family members.
“We have learnt that there were 17 girls. Police managed to rescue only six girls. It appears that the rest were shifted to some other location before the police team reached. It is important to trace the rest of the girls and rescue them. Clients can be tracked as there is digital evidence for prosecution,” Pandey said. “Prosecution of all those involved is important to end trafficking from Nepal to Goa. We appeal to the government to fast track the trial, so that the victims can depose in court before they are repatriated to Nepal.”
Earlier this week, police rescued six girls from Nepal and arrested three persons for their involvement in an alleged prostitution racket at Ribandar which was run in the form of a dance bar.
Old Goa PI Yogesh Sawant said that the accused started the operation in Goa almost a month ago by procuring girls from Nepal.
In September, police rescued six Nigerian girls and arrested three Kenyan nationals for running a sex racket.