AMBALA: A large number of residents of northern districts of Haryana often pay hefty amounts to immigration agents to reach abroad through illegal routes for “better livelihood and to earn in foreign currency”. The preferred destination for these residents is the United States of America (USA) and then the United Kingdom (UK) or Canada.
After registration of about 383 cases of immigration fraud or human trafficking by the state police, on April 17, 2023, on the orders of home minister Anil Vij, a state-level special investigation team (SIT) was formed which is headed by Ambala range inspector general of police (IGP) Sibas Kabiraj.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
If we go by the data with the Haryana police, after the formation of SIT, it has registered approximately 645 cases related to immigration fraud and human trafficking, said a police officer privy to the information in Ambala range. The SIT monitors all the cases related to immigration frauds and so far, it has recorded arrests of 518 accused persons who cheated people of money.
The officer said that the earlier complaints were mostly from northern districts of Haryana i.e. Ambala, Kurukshetra, Kaithal, Karnal, Panipat, and parts of Yamunanagar and Jind. He said now the upcoming hub is Fatehabad district in southern Haryana, as a large number of complaints are coming from this area now.
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoA senior officer said, “Most of the complainants have themselves adopted illegal means to travel abroad and their preferred destination is USA and then UK or Canada. Later, when the promises are not fulfilled by agents, they often lodge complaints with the police. Some residents pay hefty amounts up to Rs 40 to 50 lakh to agents, which is way more than the actual expenses if one goes by legal passage. The complainants often lack ability, eligibility or education to reach abroad through legal routes, but they want to go, therefore, they adopt illegal means like donkey routes.”
“Some people are lucky to reach their destination while others get stuck midway or are harassed or abducted by foreign agents for want of more money. Some are also arrested by border patrols of different countries and deported back to India after some detention period”, said the police officer.
One of the chilling case related to illegal immigration is the death of 6-year-old Gurupreet Kaur of Hasanpur village in Kurukshetra district, who died due to heat stroke in the mid of Arizona desert when she was on her way to USA through illegal route via Mexico with mother Satwinder Kaur in June 2019. Satwinder’s husband Avtar Singh (Gurupreet’s father) had been living in USA, who had also reached there through illegal route. Since the death of her daughter, Satwinder is also living in USA, seeking asylum like her husband.
Paramjit Singh of Barara town of Ambala district was held captive foreign immigration agents for 2 months in Guatemala, later he also served 10 months in jail in the USA after he crossed the border illegally. Paramjit paid an amount of Rs 35 lakh to agents to reach the USA, but his dreams were shattered. 
Jile Singh of Kurukshetra, natively from Budhera village in Karnal district, father of two sons Rajnish Kumar and Arun Kumar sold 3 acres of agricultural land to arrange Rs 30 lakh for sending his sons to USA through illegal route. But both Rajnish and Arun were deported to India by Mexican authorities on October 18, 2019, among 311 Indian nationals. They had suffered serious harassment and physical challenges while enroute to the USA through an illegal donkey route.
Donkey routes adopted by immigration agents
New Delhi - Moscow - Havana, Cuba - Panama - El Salvador - Ecuador - Colombia - Panama - Costa Rica – Nicaragua - Honduras - Guatemala - Mexico – USA