NEW DELHI: Most of the roughly 300 Indians travelling on a plane detained near Parisover suspicions of human trafficking will be free to resume their trip on Monday, according to an AFP report citing French judicial sources.
The plane is expected to take off again on Monday morning. Its destination is not yet known. It could travel to India, where the passengers are from, to Nicaragua, its original destination, or to Dubai, from where it took off, it added.
The Airbus A340, en route to Nicaragua with 303 Indian passengers, has been held at Vatry airport since Thursday when it arrived from Dubai for refueling.Top Picks For YouFrance grounds plane carrying over 300 Indians for 'human trafficking'Indians held in France over trafficking fears questionedThe detention followed an anonymous tip-off suggesting the presence of potential human trafficking victims on board.

Four French judges commenced the questioning of passengers on Sunday, aiming to ascertain the "conditions and purposes" of their travel. The judges have a two-day window to complete these interviews, with the authority to extend the detention if necessary. However, Paris prosecutors informed AFP that they anticipate clearance for the plane and its passengers by late Monday morning at the latest, without specifying the destination.
Alleged human trafficking case: French airport provides makeshift base for 300 grounded Indians
The passengers, including 11 unaccompanied minors, are currently confined to the airport, with tarpaulins covering the glass exterior of the entrance hall and nearby administrative buildings. The judicial proceedings have led to the detention of two passengers since Friday for further investigation into their potential distinct roles in the transport.

Ten passengers have sought asylum, and makeshift facilities, including individual beds, toilets, and showers, have been arranged by the local prefecture. 
The Indian embassy in Paris has confirmed its consular staff's presence on site, collaborating with French authorities for the welfare of the detained passengers and an early resolution of the situation.
Plane grounded in France: Anonymous 'human trafficking' tip, 2 detainees and other details of the flight with 303 Indians
The 30 crew members have not been detained, and the Indian embassy disclosed that some passengers may be workers from the United Arab Emirates, potentially en route to Nicaragua as a starting point for further travel to the United States or Canada. Flightradar24 data indicates that Legend Airlines, the Romanian company operating the flight, owns only four planes.