Kolkata: The West Bengal Commission for Protection of Child Rights (WBCPCR) on Monday observed this year’s ‘International Day Against Trafficking In Humans’ which was on July 30, by appointing a child with special needs as the chairperson for a day. 
WBCPCR started observing this particular day in a unique way since 2019 by appointing a vulnerable child as the chairperson for the day.In the first year, the child was a sex worker’s daughter. In the second year, a child trafficking survivor who had been rescued from child labour was appointed for the same and the third year saw a transwoman as the chairperson. 
This year, Riya Sardar, a special child, was appointed as the chairperson for the day. She was accompanied by four other special children — Anushree Mandal, Swastika Dey, Sruti Shaw and Krishan Makal who are all students from Class VIII to X in different schools. 
Some of the main points of the charter of demands which were placed by Riya Sardar was to see that the issue of special children gets included in various government organised child rights events along with the opportunity for special children to participate. “Those who communicate through Indian sign language face problems during any treatment in hospital as they have to depend on their guardians. We want the government hospitals to have people who would be able to communicate through Indian sign language. Teachers in schools should get trained in Indian sign language and Braille to help special children with vision and hearing difficulties. The anganwadi centres also should ensure welfare services for special children through regular supervision,” Sardar said. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreSardar expressed some other problems which special children often face like while boarding a bus due to the height of the steps, being ridiculed by fellow students or teachers and not having proper washroom facilities in school. The children accompanying Sardar said that these issues need to be looked into to come up with a solution. “Look at my ability, not at my disability,” they stressed. 
WBCPCR officials said that children with special needs are prone to being abused or even trafficked. “Each year we are getting children who want to talk and express themselves. They want to express their feeling of ‘nothing about us without us’ by actively participating. That is why they came to speak out about themselves,” said WBCPCR chairperson Sudeshna Roy.