BHOPAL: The human trafficking syndicate busted by the police in Sehore district of Madhya Pradesh earlier last week has kidnapped and smuggled more children from various places for prostitution.
In all 13 people including women have been arrested so far. The matter surfaced with the rescue of a seven-year-old girl kidnapped from the Ichhawar area on February 12. Ichhawar police had received reports of the abduction of a seven-year-old girl in a white car from the village of Dundlava.
Investigators claim that the accused used to identify the targets - girls of the age group of 7 to 12 years - click their pictures and send them to brokers for approval and negotiations.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThey demanded anything between Rs 2 to 5 lakh for a girl.
Sehore police have established links of the accused to red light areas in Mumbai and other places in India. Moreover, police have also received inputs from some NGOs that the gang used to administer drugs to the kidnapped girls for boosting their puberty. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLetter sent to HQs for info on missing girls 
 The inputs on drugs are yet to be verified. We are working on various angles in this case. There is a huge nexus," Sehore SP Mayank Awasthi told TOI. He said letters have been sent to police in all district headquarters seeking information about missing girls.
SP Mayank Awasthi mobilized multiple investigative teams and launched a thorough inquiry. Utilizing technical resources, they traced the perpetrators to Shivpuri district in MP, nearly 500 kilometres away and rescued the girl and reunited her with her family.
Following the arrest of the suspects, investigators uncovered the sinister truth behind the abduction- a well-oiled human trafficking network. The accused were allegedly involved in the trafficking of vulnerable individuals, particularly young girls, for the purpose of sex trade. It was revealed that traffickers would sell these girls to prostitution rings for money. The police found that accused Dayaram, was reportedly planning to sell his own niece. With his brother deceased and his sister-in-law remarried, Dayaram saw an opportunity to exploit his niece for financial gain. Police said Dayaram had communicated with gang brokers, intending to sell his niece to human traffickers. They have found pictures of more young girls in his phone.
Police also uncovered ties linking the operation to Mumbai. One of the key suspects, Kiran, who was apprehended in Shivpuri, had previously lived in Mumbai. Subsequent arrests of Kiran's sister, Vandana, and her husband, Anuj, unveiled the extent of the network. Shockingly, it was revealed that Vandana's two other sisters were still in Mumbai, reportedly employed in bars. Sources suggest that Kiran played a key role in trafficking these girls to Mumbai, implicating the network in a trans-regional web of exploitation.
Matter is being investigated for more details. Police said that they are considering subjecting a few suspects to narco analysis tests to get to the bottom of the ring.TNN