CHANDIGARH: In its continued fight against the drug menace, Haryana Police and Haryana State Narcotics Control Bureau (HSNCB) have tightened the noose on drug traffickers by invoking the provisions of the Prevention of Illicit Trafficking in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988. The PITN Act is a potent Act to clamp down on main operators of the drug trafficking network such as organizers, financers, kingpins who generally operate behind the scenes.
Director General of Police (DGP), Haryana, Shatrujeet Kapur said on Sunday that strict instructions have been issued to the district police and narcotics units to take action against drug peddlers.At the same time, action is being taken against drug smugglers under the provisions of PITNDPS Act. “We are making every effort to save the youth of the state from falling prey to drugs and are in favor of treatment for those who are addicted. Stern action is being taken against the people involved in this illegal trade, destroying their networks and confiscating their black money”, he added.
The DGP said that once a preventive detention order has been issued under the PITNDPS Act, the detenue may be detained in pursuance of the same for at least one year. Moreover, the illegally acquired properties of the detenue and his relatives/associates would also be liable for forfeiture under the NDPS Act, 1985.
In pursuance of the same, Haryana Police has got approval from the Home Department for detaining 9 large-scale drug traffickers under the provisions of the PITNDPS Act, 1988. These persons have been involved in clandestinely procuring, storing and distributing narcotics over a sustained period of time and are still actively involved in illegal drug trafficking. 8 of these detenues have already been sent to various Jails in Haryana. \
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoThe detenues belong to districts Sonipat, Mahendergarh, Panipat, Rewari, Gurugram, Panchkula and Kaithal districts of Haryana.
As part of the same process, the Home Department, Haryana has given approval for preventive detention of one more person under the provisions of the PITNDPS Act, 1988. The latest detenue named Iqbal alias Kranti is a resident of Gujarwada Mohalla, Pinangwa, District Nuh. He is a commercial trafficker of Ganja and has two FIRs registered against him for trafficking of 113 kg 170 GM and 38 kg 860 GM respectively of ganjapatti. His wife is also involved in drug trafficking activities and has an FIR under the NDPS Act, 1985 registered against her. Thus, drug trafficking is a family trait and Iqbal is the kingpin of this family business. Iqbal is currently in judicial custody and as a result of the preventive detention orders, he would not be eligible for release on bail or parole.
The Haryana State Narcotics Control Bureau is in the process of identifying properties of the aforementioned detenues so that the illegal wealth amassed by these traffickers can be attached and seized by the Competent Authority under the provisions of the NDPS Act, 1985. In addition, HSNCB has also identified more than 40 other major drug traffickers spread over various districts of Haryana for detention under the PITNDPS Act.