AHMEDABAD: The city's cybercrime branch and customs department have unearthed an international drug trafficking syndicate with a highly unusual modus operandi, which allegedly sent cocaine and high-quality processed international cannabis worth about Rs 50 lakh into the country using a private courier from America, Thailand and Canada. The drug traffickers were concealing the contraband in toys, notepads and books.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
A joint operation conducted by customs officials and the cybercrime branch recovered 2.31g of cocaine, which police valued at Rs 2.31 lakh, and 5.97kg of high-quality processed international cannabis, which they estimate to be worth Rs 46.08 lakh. These drugs were concealed in 20 parcels, 18 were sent from the US, with one packet each dispatched from Thailand and Canada. 
Speaking to reporters on Saturday, additional commissioner of police Niraj Badgujar, said, "The traffickers had employed innovative methods for distribution. The illicit substances were ingeniously hidden within toys and the pages of books. The cybercrime unit and customs department seized a number of such books and toys." 
He said both departments are watching changes in the modus operandi employed by drug traffickers. In the past, drugs had been seized from courier parcels but in small quantities. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThrough regular monitoring of cyberspace by crime branch and the customs department, intelligence was received that traffickers are using the dark web and social media platforms to deliver narcotics across borders. A joint team was set up which successfully intercepted several courier parcels. On checking the parcels, the contraband was found," he said. These parcels were sent using false names and addresses. Here, the packets would be picked up by the receiver before they reached the delivery addresses. 
Officials said a few receivers have been identified and the investigation is ongoing. The trafficking network, which spans Canada and the United States, uses the dark web and social media to distribute drugs, often at parties and social gatherings. 
Officials said the DRI and customs had earlier seized drugs and cases were also registered, but this consignment involved a large quantity. Officials seized these packets at the foreign post office in the city. 
Cyber crime cops are investigating and examining addresses of other consignments received in the city in the past to find out if the parcels were sent from similar addresses. 
Vishal Malani, a customs officer who was present at the briefing, said they were able to identify suspicious parcels based on their packaging. He said this was a big consignment. They have caught narcotics in parcels earlier, but in smaller quantities.