Two properties belonging to rapper Sean "Diddy" Combs' in Los Angeles and Miami were searched Monday by federal Homeland Security Investigations agents and other law enforcement as part of an ongoing sex trafficking investigation by federal authorities in New York, two law enforcement officials told The Associated Press.
 In a statement, Homeland Security Investigations said it "executed law enforcement actions as part of an ongoing investigation, with assistance from HSI Los Angeles, HSI Miami, and our local law enforcement partners."
According to TMZ, armed officials stormed the properties, taking three people into custody, including the rapper's sons - Justin and King.While the men appeared to be in handcuffs, it is unclear if any arrests took place.

Los Angeles-based television stations carried aerial video footage showing HSI agents and other law enforcement authorities entering an L.A. mansion on Monday in what those news outlets reported was a raid on Combs' Holmby Hills estate.


Reports also cannot confirm whether Combs was the target of the investigation. However, at the same time, the rapper's jet was tracked down in Antigua. According to TMZ, Diddy's jet took off from Palm Springs yet again and landed at Van Nuys Airport, and later took off again and landed in Antigua, where the plane is currently grounded. There is no confirmation whether Diddy is on the plane.

Tthere have been several sexual assault lawsuits filed against Combs in recent months.
 In February a music producer filed a lawsuit alleging Combs coerced him to solicit prostitutes and pressured him to have sex with them. Combs' attorney Shawn Holley has said of those allegations that "we have overwhelming, indisputable proof that his claims are complete lies."
 Combs' former protege and girlfriend, the R&B singer Cassie (Cassandra Ventura), sued him in November alleging years of sexual abuse, including rape. The lawsuit said he forced her to have sex with male prostitutes while he filmed them. The suit was settled the day after it was filed.

An HSI spokesperson, responding to a Reuters query seeking comment on the reports, said: "Earlier today, Homeland Security Investigations (HSI) New York executed law enforcement actions as part of an ongoing investigation, with assistance from HSI Los Angeles, HSI Miami, and our local law enforcement partners."
The lawsuit also accused Combs of regularly beating Ventura over the course of a 10-year professional and romantic relationship in which he controlled her through intimidation and by plying her with drugs and alcohol.
The lawsuit by Ventura was one of at least four civil complaints brought in recent months leveling sexual assault allegations against Combs, who has formerly gone by monikers including P.Diddy, Puff Daddy and Diddy.

 Another of Combs' accusers was a woman who said the rap producer raped her two decades ago when she was 17.
 Combs had said in a November statement, "I did not do any of the awful things being alleged."
 Combs is among the most influential hip-hop producers and executives of the past three decades. Formerly known as Puff Daddy, he built one of hip-hop's biggest empires, blazing a trail with several entities attached to his famous name. He is the founder of Bad Boy Records and a three-time Grammy winner who has worked with a slew of top-tier artists including Notorious B.I.G., Mary J. Blige, Usher, Lil Kim, Faith Evans and 112.
 Combs created the fashion clothing line Sean John, launched the Revolt TV channel with a focus on music, and produced the reality show "Making the Band" for MTV.
Watch Latest English Music Video Song 'No Angels' Sung By Justin Timberlake