PATNA: Two Bills related to crime control - Bihar Control of Crime Bill, 2024, and the Bihar Public Security Enforcement Bill, 2024, - were passed in the assembly on Thursday. The Bills, according to govt sources, have been introduced to crack down on trafficking, sexual offences, illegal mining, prohibition, and violations of the IT Act.
In recent years, an increase has been registered in the state in cognizable offences.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThere has also been an increase in crimes by those involved in sand mining and liquor smuggling in dry Bihar.
"The state has been witnessing rapid urbanization and expansion of economic activities. Due to the diversification of economic activities, criminal elements have been posing a new danger to the public order by changing the styles of their activities," minister incharge of home department Bijendra Prasad Yadav said as he appealed to the members of the state assembly to pass the two Bills.
Bihar Control of Crime Act, 2024, will replace the Bihar Crime Control Act, 1981. The 40-year-old Act did not have provisions to tackle the challenges which have emerged on the crime front now.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreIn sync with the same, the DMs have been vested with sweeping powers to order banishment/exile of anti-social elements from an area. Further, they would be in a position to seize ill-gotten wealth of the criminals.
The accused can appeal for redressal before the divisional commissioner, while the government would constitute a three-member advisory board consisting of retired high court judges and headed by one such judge to look into the complaints.
On the other hand, Bihar Public Security Enforcement Act, 2024 allows the government to install CCTV cameras around institutions, banks, health centres, and at all nodal points, like bus stands, to track the criminal elements. The institutions would be obliged to keep footage secure for 30 days.
Moreover, public security committees will be set up to ask the heads of institutions to abide by the norms prescribed regarding public security. If they fail to comply, they will be fined Rs 10,000 for the first month of neglect, and Rs 25,000 for the remaining months.
An official said, "These Bills will give more teeth to the agencies responsible for checking corruption, illegal mining and violation of prohibition laws in the state. All cases related to corruption and syndicate mafia will now be treated as serious offences with provisions of harsh punishment."