COIMBATORE: Pollachi East police arrested three men on Saturday for assaulting a man after they thought that he was a member of a child trafficking gang. In yet another incident, Tirupur cybercrime police arrested a man for spreading fake messages on social media about child trafficking.
The arrested men have been identified as P Thamban alias Rajendran, 35, K Guna, 27 and Karuppusamy, 25, all hailed from Thannasiyappan Kovil Street at Pollachi.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoRajendran was working as a sanitary worker at the Pollachi Municipal office.
Preliminary investigations revealed that S Vignesh, 29 of Naduvakurichi village in Tuticorin district has been working in a fruit shop in Pollachi for the last six years. He was staying in a rental house in Palani Andavar Kovil Street.
Around 8.45pm on Friday, Vignesh was on his way to the fruit shop by foot. The three persons who were under the influence of alcohol, waylaid Vignesh and thought that he was looking like a child trafficking gang member and suddenly started to assault him without any verification. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteDrive Finance ForwardCFA InstituteLearn MoreA group of the public also joined with the trio and thrashed Vignesh. But no one informed the Pollachi police.
The injured man was admitted to the Pollachi government hospital. Based on his complaint, the Pollachi East police registered a case against the trio and arrested them on Saturday morning. The arrested men were remanded in judicial custody.
In yet another incident, Tirupur rural police arrested a 34-year-old man on Saturday for spreading rumours on social media about child trafficking.
The arrested man has identified as R Arivazhagan of Moolanur in Tirupur district. Police said he circulated the fake video message on social media to various people about the assault on a North Indian youth on charges of child trafficking on Friday. The Tirupur rural cybercrime police registered a case against Arivazhagan under sections 153 and 505 (1) (b) of the Indian Penal Code and arrested him on Saturday. He was remanded in judicial custody.
Tirupur rural police have warned the people not to share such fake messages without verifying it to others. Otherwise, the cybercrime police will take stringent action and the police have been closely monitoring all the social media platforms.