NEW DELHI: Manhattan district attorney Alvin Bragg declared the successful return of 30 stolen antiquities to Cambodia and Indonesia. The artifacts, worth around $3 million, were part of an illicit trade network involving American dealers and traffickers, including Indian-American smuggler Subhash Kapoor.
“We are continuing to investigate the wide-ranging trafficking networks that continue to target Southeast Asian antiquities.PollDo you think Joe Biden will drop out of the US presidential race?YesNoWhile we have made significant progress and have dismantled several prominent networks, there is clearly still much more work to do. These repatriation ceremonies show our continued commitment to protecting cultural heritage and returning stolen antiquities back home,” Bragg said.

The repatriated collection comprises 27 artifacts from Phnom Penh, Cambodia, and three from Jakarta, Indonesia. Notable items include the 'Shiva Triad,' a bronze idol of the Hindu deity Shiva, unlawfully taken from Cambodia, and a stone bas-relief portraying two royal figures from Indonesia's Majapahit empire, dating back to the 13th-16th century, which was stolen.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCPXJherli: Discover Extra Income with Amazon CFDCPXLearn MoreCambodia royal ambassador Keo Chhea said, “Today’s ceremony isn’t just about returning lost treasures; it’s a renewal of commitment between nations to safeguard the soul of our shared heritage. This commitment, built on robust cooperation, is what makes today significant.”
“Cambodia and the United States are setting a global standard for protecting and repatriating cultural heritage. Through this united effort, we ensure the preservation of our collective past for future generations.”
Manhattan district attorney Alvin Bragg specifically identified Subhash Kapoor, an Indian-American art dealer, and Nancy Wiener, an American dealer, for their involvement in the trafficking of these items. Kapoor, who has been under investigation by US justice authorities for over a decade in an operation named "Hidden Idol," was arrested in Germany in 2011. He was later extradited to India, where he stood trial and was sentenced to 13 years in prison in November 2022 for his crimes.