NEW DELHI: With Covid-19 restrictions eased, 2022 saw an increase in the number of women, children and other victims being rescued from the clutches of human traffickers in Delhi compared with a year ago. 

The number of cases reported also went up. Policemen, experts and NGOs involved in the rescue operations confirmed that there was a spurt in human trafficking in the city soon after the Covid restrictions were lifted.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Data showed that as many as 688 people were rescued last year, whereas 2021 saw 509 rescues. As many as 92 cases were registered in 2021. On the other hand, 106 cases were reported in 2022. The number of arrests, however, came down: while 174 people were nabbed in 2021, only 137 traffickers were caught in 2022.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA Institute“The lifting of Covid restrictions resulted in higher demand for labour in the city. This could be one of the reasons for an uptick in trafficking cases. Prostitution rackets also became more active,” the officer said. 
There was a clear change in the modus operandi too. Virender Kumar Singh, director of an NGO, said that after 2020, they found that traffickers had moved online and were trapping young girls and women through various social networking sites and games. “Earlier, the gangs would visit remote villages and traffic girls and women to the capital by luring them with jobs, love and promise of marriage. The situation has changed post-Covid. People now spend hours searching the internet. These traffickers made fake accounts on the internet and started chatting with girls and women. After gaining their trust, they would call them to different places for meetings and traffic them,” he said.
A Child Welfare Committee official said they had found that traffickers were using multiple buses to bring children into the capital and forcing them to work as house help or labourers in factories. “Earlier, they mostly used trains, but due to heightened vigil and raids by law enforcement officials, they are now using buses," the official said. Another CWC member said that in most of the cases, they found that the traffickers were known to the victims.
A senior officer of Delhi Police said their out-of-turn promotion scheme had led to more rescues. “The cops on ground worked harder in tracing missing children," he said. Kumar Gyanesh, Delhi Police PRO, said that to curb human trafficking in the capital, they had a dedicated anti-human trafficking unit (AHTU) in place in every district, as well as a centralised team of AHTU in the Crime Branch.