Bhubaneswar: Ahead of elections, police and excise officers have stepped up their crackdown on ganja smugglers and cultivators following a directive by the Election Commission of India. ECI sources said ganja may be used to induce voters akin to other freebies like liquor, cash and other drugs. 
Ganja cultivated over hundreds of acres in Kandhamal, Boudh, Gajapati, Koraput, Malkangiri and Rayagada districts have been destroyed in the last one month.Police and excise officers have also seized hundreds of quintals of ganja from different districts. 
To ensure the ECI directions are executed properly, chief secretary P K Jena and director general of police Arun Sarangi have been holding meetings with enforcement agencies at regular intervals. 
“Conduct of peaceful and inducement-free elections is our motto. Special drives have been launched against ganja trafficking and cultivation. Over 500 quintals of ganja and 5,000 acres of poppy plants have been destroyed in the first three months of this year,” DGP Sarangi said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoPolice sources said the estimated cost of ganja plants destroyed per acre is between Rs 1.4 lakh and Rs 1.5 lakh. In the black market, ganja is sold between Rs 50,000 and Rs 1 lakh per kg depending on its quality.
Official sources said ganja plants worth Rs 329 crore (23,537 acres) were destroyed in the state in 2020-21, Rs 332 crore (23,724 acres) in 2021-22 and Rs 341 crore (24,395 acres) in 2022-23. 
IGP (special task force), J N Pankaj, said police have made record seizures, arrests and destruction of ganja plants. “We have held meetings with police personnel of neighbouring Andhra Pradesh and Chhattisgarh to curb ganja smuggling. Our enforcement against ganja trafficking is the highest in the country,” Pankaj said. 
Ganja is mainly cultivated in Malkangiri, Koraput, Boudh, Kandhamal and Rayagada districts and supplied to Delhi, Mumbai, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh and Karnataka.
Police said anyone foudn cultivating cannabis can be jailed for up to 10 years and fined up to Rs 1 lakh under Section 20 of the Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (NDPS) Act.
Police said Maoists are the biggest promoters of ganja cultivation in Odisha as they get commission from the illegal business. Maoists often instigate villagers to cultivate ganja and provoke them to attack enforcement officials during raids, they said. 
To ensure smooth elections, state excise commissioner Narasingha Bhol recently convened a meeting with his Andhra Pradesh and Chhattisgarh counterparts and sought their cooperation to prevent drugs smuggling.