BHOPAL: The accused arrested in the kidnapping case of minor sisters seem to be connected to national and international human trafficking rackets. Police recovered two other minor girls including three-months-old Angel and three-years-old Akiro from the arrested couple’s home. 
The accused kept misleading the police claiming that a North India based woman doctor had given them the girls to take care.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoBut during investigation police found call recordings which suggested that the accused were bargaining with the woman doctor to sell the abducted minor sisters. Separate teams of police have been sent to nab the woman doctor. 
Kotwali police said that two unidentified women abducted eleven-months-old Deepawali and her 8-year-old sister Kajal from outside a temple near Peer Gate in Kotwali on Saturday morning around 10.30am on the pretext of taking them for Kanya-Bhoj. 
Acting on their mother’s complaint, Kotwali police registered an abduction case in the matter and recovered the girls from a house in Kolar after 60 hours. Police scanned footage of more than 200 CCTV cameras and traced the accused from their home in English Villa Colony in Kolar. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstitutePolice said that the accused including Archana Saini, 36, her live-in-partner Nishant, 31, Archana’s son Suraj, 19, her 14-year-old minor daughter and Suraj’s live-in-partner Muskan, 20, were arrested. Apart from the abducted sisters, police recovered a 3-month-old girl Angel and a 3-year-old girl Akiro. Initially, Archana claimed that Angel and Akiro were her daughters. Later, during investigations she revealed that a woman doctor had given them to her to take care of. The accused kept misleading the cops and were not co-operating in interrogation. Police have found their links to national and international human trafficking rackets. 
Police said that during preliminary investigation it was revealed that the kingpin of the racket Archana Saini, 36, hails from Punjab. She was married and resided with her husband in Faridabad in Haryana. She has two children from her first marriage -Suraj and a minor 14-year-old daughter. She told police that after a dispute with her husband she left him and went to Mumbai where she started working in an event management company. She came in contact with Nishant, 31, who hails from Kerala, through a matrimonial website and both moved into a live-in-relationship. 
 Another accused, Muskan Bano, 20, hails from Barabanki in Uttar Pradesh. She came in contact with Archana’s son Suraj through social media and left home around six months back. Since then, she had been living with him. The couple chose Bhopal because Nishant had studied hotel management from here and was acquainted with the city. They shifted to Bhopal due to lower living expenses around three months back. Earlier they resided in Nishatpura on rent and moved to Kolar recently. 
DCP (Zone-3) Riyaz Iqbal said that during initial investigations it was revealed that the accused wanted to sell the abducted minor girls. Police have found their call recordings with the woman doctor in which they were heard bargaining. The other two minor girls recovered from the house and were handed over to the Child Welfare Committee. The accused claimed that the minor girls were given to them by the woman doctor, but it was being verified. Their names are of foreign origin, Akiro is a Japanese name, thus, involvement of international human trafficking racket cannot be ruled out.