MUMBAI: A probe into a child trafficking case has led the crime branch to identify eight children in all who were allegedly sold by the gang. Five people, including a 63-year-old woman who acted as tout, were arrested on Friday. The police have identified all kids sold by the gang. They said the gang running the racket for over five years could have sold over 20 kids.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
The tough part the police now face is that some kids are settled with some well-to-do families and taking them away would disturb the emotional well-being of the kids and the adoptive parents.
Crime branch on Wednesday busted a child trafficking racket while probing a complaint of a drug addict couple selling their kids - a month-old daughter and a 2-year-old son. Police rescued the girl who has been sent to the Child Welfare Committee and arrested the parents, Shabbir Khan, his wife Sania, besides the adoptive father Shakeel Makrani. The three are in custody till November 29. Makrani had paid Rs 14,000 to the couple. The couple also told the police they sold their son for Rs 60,000 to a Virar family whom the police have now identified.
The police arrested Usha Anil Rathod, the tout, and she led them to another woman, Manikramma Bhandari (63) from Chakala. The police also arrested Shafique Shaikh (45), Balkrishna Kamble (33) and Vaishali Phagaria Phagaria from Byculla who bought the child from Shafique and Kamble who is the father of the child sold to Phagaria. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteInspector Daya Nayak said that the probe suggests that the accused have sold at least eight kids.
Police also identified two families, one from Tamil Nadu and another from Maharashtra, who bought two kids from this gang without following the adoption process. "Some of the accused are hardcore. We have just arrested them. We hope they will start singing about their deeds in police custody," said DCP Raj Tilak Roushan.
Police inspector Sachin Puranik, Deepak Pawar and constables Sanjay Bhosle, Sachin Raut were part of the police team.