NEW DELHI: After being trafficked for sex when she was 15 years old, Ashi (name changed) hoped that govt compensation would help her get back on her feet. The teenager, who is now combating HIV, and the financial burden due to her illness has left the family struggling. After a lengthy legal battle, the court awarded her an Rs 1 lakh last year to add to the Rs 1.75 lakh she had received, but Delhi govt hasn’t disbursed that extra sum.The young woman is now demanding an enhanced sum so she can continue her studies and also be treated for HIV.
Ashi is demanding compensation under the Delhi Victim Compensation Scheme for ‘rehabilitation of victims of human trafficking/kidnapping, gang rape and physical abuse of minor’. According to the NALSAR policy, the family should have got around Rs 7.5 lakh as interim compensation but has only received a fraction of it.
In Dec 2017, the young girl from northeast Delhi quarrelled with her parents and left home in a huff and stayed with a friend. “Once my anger subsided, I was returning back home when I met someone I was acquainted with and told him about my situation,” said Ashi, now 22 years old. “He convinced me that I should accompany him to Jaipur to work with his sister, who he said was an embroiderer.”
Ashi, recalling “my worst decision”, left for Jaipur with the man. “There, I met the supposed sister of the person, who asked me both to conceal my true identity and to cut off contact with my parents.” This made the teenager suspicious and she managed to surreptitiously call her mother and tell her she was in Jaipur.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA Institute“I was given food, soon after which I felt dizzy and lost consciousness,” she continued. All she remembers of that drugged day is that there were three people, all adults, in the room with her. “When I woke up, I realised the woman had discovered I had used her phone to call my mother and she assaulted me.” Apparently, Ashi’s mother had called back the woman.
Ashi’s parents contacted the cops in Delhi and registered an FIR. Police were able to trace the trafficker and the woman who had taken her in. Realising they were in a bind, they abandoned the girl in a bus.
Ashi was reunited with her parents but her troubles were far from over. “Soon after she returned home, her health began deteriorating,” her mother said. “In a few months, we were told she had HIV.” The mother, an employee at a clothes factory, earns just Rs 6,000 a month. “I have three children. Ashi’s treatment put so much pressure on her that we had to pull her out of school,” she said.
Ashi, who has studied up to Class X, wistfully said, “I wish I were able to sit for my Class XII board exams. Maybe that isn’t my fate.” Each hospital visit underscores the urgent need for financial and emotional assistance. After receiving Rs 1.75 lakh in seven years, the family was granted an additional Rs 1 lakh by a court last year, but Ashi is yet to receive it. Litigation is on in Delhi High Court for a higher compensation.
Shaheen Malik, founder, Brave Souls Foundation, which is helping Ashi in her legal battle, said, “The treatment of the victim is not only tedious but also unaffordable for someone from her financial background. She wants to continue studying but is unable to do so. The state should take responsibility for her complete rehabilitation.”