BENGALURU: Home minister G Parameshwara said the state has formally requested the ministry of external affairs to revoke Prajwal Revanna’s diplomatic passport to force the Hassan MP to return from abroad. Prajwal, grandson of former PM HD Deve Gowda, is facing charges of rape and sexual assault and a court has issued a warrant for his arrest. 
“Chief minister Siddaramaiah has already written to the PM, but, in accordance with law, the (home) department has also written,” Parameshwara told reporters.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoIf they cancel his passport, Prajwal will be compelled to return.” 
Based on an application by the special team established by the state govt to investigate allegations of serial sexual assault against the MP, a special court for elected representatives issued an arrest warrant against Prajwal on Saturday. 
On allegations of phone tapping, Parameshwara denied any govt involvement, saying: “If they (Deve Gowda’s family) suspect their phones are tapped, let them provide proof and we will conduct an inquiry.” ‘Drugs-free Karnataka’ Parameshwara also outlined the govt’s commitment to combat drug abuse, saying, “We are working towards making Karnataka drugs-free. The accused will be caught, and sources of drug supply will be investigated. It is important to identify peddlers. We will also stop rave parties.” 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreHe suggested the establishment of a special unit to track drug trafficking from other states and monitoring students engaged in the drugs trade.
Chief minister Siddaramaiah recently urged Prime Minister Narendra Modi to take immediate action through the ministries of external affairs and home affairs to revoke the diplomatic passport of Prajwal Revanna. This request was made in a letter dated May 1.
Interpol has already issued a 'Blue Corner Notice' to gather information about Prajwal's current location. This notice was issued following a request from the Special Investigation Team (SIT) through the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI).
When asked about JD(S) leader and former chief minister H D Kumaraswamy's plea to his nephew, Prajwal Revanna, to return to India and cooperate with the investigation, home minister Parameshwara stated, "I have seen it in the media, it is their family's internal matter, let him (Prajwal) come and face the law."
Regarding Kumaraswamy's claim that the phones of 40 individuals, including his own, his family members, and supporters, are being tapped, Parameshwara reiterated, "I have already said that the government has not tapped the phones of Kumaraswamy or 40 people that he has claimed. If he has accurate information that it has been done, let him give the information, we will get it investigated as to who has done it and why."
When questioned about whether the SIT will also investigate the alleged audio conversation between deputy chief minister D K Shivakumar and BJP leader Devaraje Gowda concerning the leak of explicit videos allegedly involving Prajwal Revanna, Parameshwara responded, "they (SIT) will decide it, at every level the government will not instruct about the investigation, we have nothing to do with it. SIT has been given total freedom to investigate and they will investigate as per their mandate."