NEW DELHI: More than 15% of over 13,500 children rescued from exploitative working conditions were employed in a hotel or a dhaba, revealed a study of rescue data available with Kailash Satyarthi Children’s Foundation. The ‘mom-and-pop’ automobile and transport industry was second in the list of sectors at 13%, followed by garments industry, retail shops/office and cosmetics.
The least number of rescues were made from the cosmetics industry; however, it employed the maximum number of children (26) in the tender age group of 5 to 8 years.One of the reasons for employing very small children is, for packing small items like lipsticks, small hands are preferred. Also, employers do not like to pay for packing, so most of these kids do not get any money.
These findings, released by Kailash Satyarthi Children’s Foundation and their partner organisations to mark 'World Day Against Trafficking in Persons' observed each year on July 30, are based on rescue operations carried out to free children from exploitative conditions from across 262 districts and 21 states in India between the year 2016 and 2022.
The study also analysed the data on factories from where children were rescued and the tasks assigned to them. Electricals and electronics factories employed the maximum number of trafficked children in bulb making, followed by wire packing and factory helper. Children were employed as labour in agriculture-based employment units and in brick kiln and roof tiles units; in garment factories they were found to be engaged in saree colouring and polishing, as spinning mill helper, tailoring and for dye work.
Of the over 13,549 children rescued between 2016 to 2022 over 80% (10,934) were adolescents in the age group of 13 to 18 years and around 13% (1,781) belonged to the 9-12 age group. The data found that among those rescued 274 were between 5 to 8 years old and 31 were below 5 years.
Rear Admiral (retired) Rahul Kumar Shrawat, managing director, KSCF, said, “Even as the numbers look grim and worrisome, there is no denying the fact that the way India has dealt with the child trafficking issue in the past decade has given much teeth and momentum to the cause. However, this needs to be supported by a stringent and comprehensive anti-trafficking law so it is our demand that the Anti-Trafficking Bill be passed in this session of the Parliament itself. Our children are in danger and we have no time to lose.”
Based on the rescue data, Jaipur city emerged to be one of the prominent destinations for trafficked children with the maximum number (1,115) rescued from the district, accounting for 9% of the total. Next in line were two districts from the capital city, North Delhi with 5.24% of total rescues and northwest Delhi with 5.13% of the total number of rescued children. Five out of top 10 districts from where the maximum number of trafficked children were rescued in the country’s capital.
Among the states from where the rescues were carried out Uttar Pradesh saw the maximum number of children trafficked on an average per year – 267 in the pre-Covid phase between 2016 to 2019 and 1,214 in 2021-22. UP was followed by Bihar and Andhra Pradesh, together making up the top three states from where the maximum number of children trafficked on an average per year.