MUMBAI: The charter flight, detained by French authorities last week for carrying passengers who were suspected victims of human trafficking, landed in Mumbai on Tuesday, with 276 out of the original 303 passengers on board.
Two passengers who were detained last week by the French authorities for investigation were released by their court on Monday, according to media reports.A number of passengers sought asylum and among them was a 21-month old child and unaccompanied minors.
The flight, which was repeatedly delayed finally landed in Mumbai around 4.15 am. “The passengers were interrogated by the immigration and other law-enforcing agencies,” said a source. They were inside the airport terminal for about 3-4 hours after arrival.
Most of the passengers were young men from the state of Punjab, carrying a single piece of luggage. When they stepped out of the terminal building, they avoided the media persons, covered their faces and refused to speak.
Last Thursday, the A340 charter flight operated by Romanian carrier Legend Airlines was bound for Managua, the capital of Nicaragua, the largest country in central America. Following a tip-off about the plane carrying suspected victims of human trafficking, the "donkey flight" was stopped by the French authorities when it made a technical halt at Chalons-Vatry airport, in north-eastern France. The term "donkey flight" ("dunki" in Punjabi) refers to a modus operandi in which illegal immigrants travel to a third country that grants easy access and from there leave for their final destination, helped by "agents". The term referred to Indian and Pakistani migrants who used the said method to illegally enter US, UK and Canada.
After the aircraft was detained in France, the reception area at Vatry airport was transformed into a waiting space with separate beds to ensure optimal passenger accommodation, said reports. Another report citing French judicial sources, said that the authorities there were no longer probing for potential people trafficking but have launched a probe to see if there was violation of immigration laws.
Early on Monday, the Legend Airlines flight was earlier scheduled to depart for India after the French authorities completed legal formalities. The Indian embassy in France thanked French authorities on social media platform, X, for the “quick resolution of the situation” . But the departure was delayed after some passengers were reportedly unhappy over their return back to India. Media reports said they preferred to continue to Nicaragua as planned. According to reports there were 11 unaccompanied minors among the 303 Indians who were bound for Nicaragua.
Timeline:
On December 21, Legend Airlines A340 aircraft operating a flight from Fujairah in United Arab Emirates to Nicaragua with 303 passengers, including 11 minors stopped for refueling in Vatry, northeast France.
The aircraft was grounded by the police following an anonymous tipoff about the plane carrying potential victims of human trafficking.
The reception area at Vatry airport was transformed into a waiting space with separate beds for passenger accommodation.
French authorities begin investigations and legal formalities.
Two passengers were detained, while others sought asylum.
According to media reports, 25 passengers sought asylum in France. Among these passengers were a 21-month old child and unaccompanied minors. They were transferred to a special zone in Paris’ Charles de Gaulle airport for asylum-seekers.
The two passengers who were detained for investigation into human trafficking were produced before a judge and thereafter released on Monday, according to media reports that quoted the Paris prosecutor’s office. The judge named them as ”assisted witnesses” to the case, reports said.
On Monday evening, the Airbus A340 (YRLRE), operating Legend Airlines flight LAL-1216, departed Vatry with 276 of the original 303 passengers on board.
It landed in Mumbai around 4.15 am on Tuesday after a nine hour flight.
On arrival the passengers were interrogated by law-enforcing authorities and the immigration.
They stayed inside the airport terminal for about 3 to 4 hours after which they exited and looked for options to travel back to their state.
A number of passengers were from Punjab. They refused to speak to the media.First Visuals of Airbus A340 held in France with 303 Indians, lands in Mumbai
11 unaccompanied minors among 303 Indian passengers on flight grounded in France