MUMBAI: Mumbai police have busted a child trafficking racket and rescued one of the two babies allegedly sold by their drug-user parents for Rs 74,000. Three of the four accused, including the babies' parents, were arrested on Thursday.
The arrested accused include parents Shabbir and Sania Khan, and Shakeel Makrani who allegedly paid for the babies.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoUsha Rathod, the alleged agent who took commission for the sale, has been detained.
Crime branch unit 9 led by police inspector Daya Nayak on Thursday rescued the month-old baby girl from D N Nagar in Andheri. 
Search for the other baby, a two-old boy, has led them to a widespread child trafficking racket. At the time of going to press, the police team was in the process of raiding various places in Andheri and even outside city limits to track those involved in trafficking.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreThe case came to light when Shabbir's 32-year-old sister lodged an FIR last week. The sister, who lives in Bharat Nagar in Bandra with her autorickshaw driver husband, said Shabbir and Sania had moved in with them some years ago but due to their drug habit, the couple was asked to vacate the flat.
Shabbir and Sania initially moved to Versova in Andheri and in 2019 to Nalasopara. In 2021, the couple had a son and in October 2023 a daughter.
On October 5, the couple visited the complainant at her place at Bharat Nagar and said they were facing a financial crisis and were unable to pay their rent in Nalasopara. The sister allowed the couple to live in her flat and asked them about their two children. "Initially they were reluctant to share any information but after the complainant insisted, Sania said they had sold both the kids for monetary consideration. The complainant was shocked and couldn't digest what she had heard. The couple allegedly admitted to being in a financial crisis due to their drug habit and said they sold their two-year-old son for Rs 60,000 and month-old daughter for Rs 14,000," said a police official.
The complainant asked them to spill the beans about whom they had sold the babies to. The couple said the sale took place through an agent, Usha Rathod, who in turn gave the child to Makrani who lives in Dongar area of D N Nagar in Andheri. 
A senior police official confirmed the report and said their rescue operation for the other child was underway.