NEW DELHI: Delhi Police claimed to have busted a child trafficking racket with the arrest of eight people from Rohini district’s Begampur and Punjab. The gang allegedly sold newborn babies for Rs 12-15 lakh in Delhi after buying them from poor families in Punjab for about Rs 50,000.
Initially, three of the suspects were arrested in Begumpur and a newborn girl, “purchased” for Rs 50,000, recovered in Punjab.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoSubsequent raids in Punjab led to the arrest of five more suspects, including a quack who was running a clinic. The gang may have trafficked between 200 and 500 children, according to cops probing the case.
The matter came to light on Feb 20 when some residents in Begampur informed police that a child was being kept in a house in their locality and they suspected illegal activity.
“A team went to the rented accommodation and found two women — a mother-daughter duo — with a 14-day-old girl. Neither woman could provide any information about the child’s parents. During questioning, they revealed an interstate human trafficking gang that bought and sold newborns in various states of northern India was operating,” police said, adding the toddler was rescued and the women were arrested.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreAn officer said that the women had rented the house six months earlier. Nearby residents initially heard children crying, but as it stopped after some days, they didn’t suspect anything at the time. However, the crying resumed on Feb 20, raising their suspicions.
The woman’s son, Piyush Aggarwal, was also among the suspects arrested. Investigation revealed the baby’s mother had given birth at a hospital in Punjab’s Abohar. DCP (Rohini) Guriqbal Singh Sidhu said they formed teams led by SHO (Begampur) Rajiv Ranjan which conducted raids across Punjab, resulting in more arrests.
According to police, the gang ran a meticulous operation. The members scoured remote areas of Punjab, targeting economically disadvantaged families with many children and luring them with the promise of money. Investigators suspect hospital staff may have divulged patient information. While Raman and his wife, two suspects held in Punjab, allegedly collected babies from parents and informed the ringleader, Rajinder and a 36-year-old woman were tasked with delivering the children to Delhi, said cops.
“In some cases, they targeted pregnant women and their families a few months before the delivery, offering large sums to sell the babies,” an officer said.
The gang also established criteria for selling the babies, based on factors such as skin colour, gender and health, he added.
A 45-year-old midwife was among those held for allegedly assisting them. “She posed as a doctor in her village in Punjab. We suspect she also lured poor people seeking childbirth services to sell their babies,” the officer said, adding that the mastermind is absconding. “He used to identify potential buyers,” he said.
Raids, meanwhile, have been going on for the past seven days, the officer said. “We are searching for two individuals — one in Punjab and another in Delhi. We have also contacted the child’s mother, who is bedridden after the delivery,” he added.
The accused have been booked under sections 370(4) (trafficking), 120B (conspiracy) and 34 (common intention) of IPC and Section 81 of Juvenile Justice Act.