NEW DELHI: Police in east Delhi have busted an international illegal immigration racket arresting nine people who were part of a network spanning India and Bangladesh.
Police have also found out that one of the operatives had floated shell companies abroad to issue fictitious work permits which the illegal immigrants, primarily from Bangladesh and India, would use to enter European countries.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Police found 226 passports during a search in the Mayur Vihar area of east Delhi.
The people wanting to immigrate were promised relocation to European countries through donkey routes through India.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreOn a tip-off they got on January 4, police laid a trap to catch a Bangladeshi national living in India illegally and allegedly involved in trafficking. “The suspect was nabbed.... Along with him, two more Bangladeshi nationals accompanying him were caught. This unveiled a complex network of agents and traffickers engaged in illicit activities.” Achin Garg, ACP (east), said.
Garg added that the suspects said they aspired to reach Europe through a clandestine network facilitated by collaborators in Bangladesh. “It came to light that the suspects maintained communication with a person called Akbar for assistance in fabricating Aadhaar cards, PAN cards and other documents to fake Indian nationality,” he said. The seized documents from the Bangladeshi nationals hinted at a well-coordinated effort, involving various languages and connections with traffickers operating in Delhi and Bangladesh, police said.
Further interrogation led to the identification of Akbar's residence in Sarita Vihar, where he was arrested. Two other suspects, identified as Younus Khan and Mohammad Ibraheem, were also arrested with Akbar.
A case was registered in Mayur Vihar police station under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code and a deeper investigation began.
The probe has shown that the racket is the work of its mastermind in Dhaka, Bangladesh, in the guise of running a manpower consultancy. People wanting to illegally migrate were charged an advance that could be between Rs 1 lakh and Rs 5 lakh.
“It came to light that Ibraheem had opened multiple shell companies abroad to issue fictitious work permits fabricating fake police documents, educational certificates and work permits for European countries, along with notary documents, keeping victims enticed in the process,” a police source said.
Once in India, the people who had decided to migrate were coerced into paying more money under the pretext of various visas. The racketeers extorted more money from their victims, exploiting the expiration of their visas and persuading them to stay beyond their permitted period.
The syndicate collaborated with Dheeraj Bishnoi and Narender Arya in running “Paradise Consultancy” to create fake work permits. Agents in Kolkata were involved in producing fake Aadhaar and PAN cards for the victims, while hawala methods facilitated the transfer of money from Bangladesh.
On January 10, Bishnoi and Arya were arrested. The police also nabbed Gaurav Gulati, employed in multimedia and animation work, for allegedly editing fake documents for the consultancy on the instructions of Arya.
Police said that further investigation was under way to nab the other accused who are absconding.