NEW DELHI: Police have started a financial investigation into the murder of Swiss national Nina Berger after finding out about high-value transactions in suspect Gurpreet Singh's account and seizing unaccounted for cash from a car he had used. Police are also probing if Gurpreet (30) was a part of a trafficking racket and had killed Nina (30) for refusing to be a part of it.
Sources said the Enforcement Directorate and income tax officials have been informed.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe Economic Offences Wing of the police could start a parallel probe, sources said.
Nina's body was found in West Tilak Nagar on Friday. She was believed to have come to Delhi from Zurich. 
About the trafficking angle, officials said that certain indicators that cropped up during the probe led police to probe if trafficking wasinvolved. The recovery of four pistols, around 50 rounds of ammunition, four bottles of petrol and money scattered inside a Nano that Gurpreet used raised red flags.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoDuring inquiry, police also found out that the car was registered in the name of a person with whom Singh had some monetary dealings. "We are searching for the person who was the owner of the vehicle," a police source said.
Besides the seizure of huge unaccounted for cash, and his Santro car registered in the name of a woman who Gurpreet claimed was a sex worker, the police have stumbled upon evidence that shows that he was in touch with 10-12 foreign women. Police are interrogating Gurpreet in this regard and efforts are being made to contact these women.
Also, there were visible signs of torture, including burns, cut marks and blisters on Nina's body that, cops had initially said, were reminiscent of torture by traffickers.
The accused was produced in court and he was sent to four days' police custody. On Sunday, Swiss embassy officials met the investigators and exchanged information. The police have sought their assistance in contacting the family and getting an autopsy conducted. 
During interrogation, Gurpreet told police that it was Nina's third visit to India in the last 2-3 years. Gurpreet claims to have visited Switzerland eight times at the same time.
Initially, he told policehe was in touch with foreigners in connection with the gems and astrology business which his father ran. However, police have not beentaking his claims at facevalue and are corroborating his versions with available evidence.
Police on Sunday recorded the statements of the colony guards and other members of the society where Gurpreet lived. They questioned his family. The investigators had gone with the accused to reconstruct the scene of the crime. He took him to Shahpur Khatha where he had parked the car and left.
The accused has repeatedly changed his statements. "He now claims he had hired contract killers to kill her inside the car. His testimony is being verified," a source said.
CCTV footage has shown Gurpreet walking into a society after parking the car. He was clad in black and with a bag. An officer said he was not cooperating and not replying to questions properly.