MUMBAI: Bombay high court observing that cross-border infiltration was “a serious concern” called for a proper affidavit from a police superintendent in Sangli after reiterating its dissatisfaction with investigations into allegations that minor girls from Bangladesh were being trafficked and forced into prostitution on forged Indian documents.
 A bench of Justices A S Gadkari and Shivkumar Dige hearing a petition by an NGO on Thursday, said the “most vital’’ aspect of the crime was not investigated in an FIR registered last year with Vishrambaug police station for various offences including under the Immoral Trafficking Prevention Act.The bench said the cross-border infiltration “is not being looked at seriously by investigators’’ and directed the Sangli SP to file the affidavit in two weeks. 
The court wanted to know what was done in Bangladesh to find out how these children were brought here, observing that there exists a cross border treaty with Bangladesh.
The HC was not interested in just one raid to uncover illegal trafficking but was keen to know about a probe to unearth any syndicate or modus operandi that facilitated such trafficking. Who continues to traffic such girls and provides them with Indian birth certificates, passports and Aadhar cards as alleged, is what the HC wants the police to focus on.
Public prosecutor Aruna Pai submitted that the police was investigating seriously and making progress. Freedom Firm, a NGO filed a petition last October before the HC alleging that minor victims of human trafficking rescued during raids on brothels had allegedly been sexually exploited by officers of Vishrambag police station.
The Sangli police on January 29 submitted a report that said a police constable at Vishrambaug police station “has sexually exploited one of the victims.’’ The report led to FIR for alleged offences of rape and under Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (Pocso) and accused was arrested on February 1.
In its latest affidavit submitted by its advocates Wesley Menezes and WN Pathan, the NGO said the girls opened up during counselling sessions and “Most shockingly, the victims revealed that police officers would visit the brothel and have sexual intercourse with two…’’.
The accused officer contended before the Child welfare committee (CWC) that the NGO officials “tutored’’ the rescued girls to accuse police of abusing them. “Investigation is not carried out to unearth the serious crime,’’ the HC had said earlier in March and this week again questioned the police who said it sought details from UIDAI about the cards that were seized.