Raipur: The police apprehended three suspects, including two inter-state traffickers hailing from Uttar Pradesh, leading to seizure of more than two quintals of marijuana worth about Rs 27,50,000. The incident took place in Fafadih Chowk area, falling under the jurisdiction of the Ganj police station. The suspects were caught red-handed while transporting marijuana in a vehicle.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoBoth traffickers, originally from Uttar Pradesh, were attempting to conceal the contraband inside cartons among helmets placed in rear of the vehicle.
Investigations revealed that the traffickers were transporting marijuana from Koraput in Odisha to Uttar Pradesh. A total of two quintals and 15 kilograms of marijuana were confiscated from the accused. Additionally, the vehicle with registration number CG04NL2559 and 88 pieces of helmets used in the trafficking operation were seized. The estimated value of the seized contraband is Rs 27,50,000. The accused now face charges under section 20(B) of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985, as per the case registered at the Ganj police station. A joint team was formed to gather information about individuals involved in the illegal drug trade.
The operation took place on January 15, 2024, following information received by the Narcotics Cell regarding individuals transporting marijuana from the Telghani Naka to the city. Senior police officers, including Lakhna Patle, additional police superintendent of crimes Pitambar Singh Patel, City police superintendent Yogesh Sahu and deputy police superintendent of crimes Dinesh Sinha, oversaw the operation.
The joint team, consisting of anti-crime and cyber unit and Ganj police station, intercepted the suspects near the Fafradih Chowk, leading to the arrest of Monish Qureshi, 24 (Pichokada, Baghpat district of UP), Sahil Khan, 20 (Badoud police station area of UP), and Bhojram Sahu, alias Bholu, 23, (Amleshwar, Durg district of Chhattisgarh). The seized contraband, along with the apprehended individuals, were handed over to Ganj police station for further legal proceedings. SHO Ashish Yadav, sub-inspector Mukesh Sori from Anti-Crime and Cyber Unit, and other key members played a pivotal role in the operation.