Hyderabad: On the eve of ‘World Day Against Trafficking in Persons’, experts pointed out that awareness about various facets of human trafficking and reporting the crime to law enforcement agencies play a key role in tackling the menace. 
Speaking at an event organised by Youngistaan Foundation in the city on Saturday, Telangana State Commission for Protection of Child Rights chairperson J Srinivasa Rao highlighted the gravity of the crime, saying that an alarming number of around 13 lakh women in the country who went missing were yet to be traced. 
“Each year, numerous people, especially women, fall prey to heinous practices such as bonded labour, human trafficking, prostitution, forced marriages, among others, with only a few cases being reported. There is an urgent need for self-awareness. Recognize and act against such crimes, seek assistance from the dedicated police force that stands ready to serve the citizens at all times,” he said. 
Survivors, who were rescued with the help of government and police departments, shared their stories at the event, shedding light on the horrors of bondage labour, child labour, physical abuse, and other atrocities they had endured. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More“I was taken to Bengaluru at the age of 15 on the pretext of work. I was forced to do road construction work and the contractor never paid the promised amount. We rarely would get food and there were no washroom facilities. I was also physically harassed by my employer’s son,” said a survivor.
Arun Daniel Yellamaty, founder of Youngistaan Foundation, stressed on the collective responsibility in tackling human trafficking. “There are various forms of trafficking, such as child begging, sexual exploitation, forced marriage, and child selling, and as responsible citizens there is a need to identify such instances,” he pointed out. Arun asked people to report any suspicious activities to police. 
Anish Anthony, chief delivery officer at T-Hub, spoke about the pivotal role of technology in spreading awareness about crime such as human trafficking. “Be vigilant about engaging with strangers, verify mutual connections on social media before indulging with anyone, and promptly report suspicious activity or unknown scammers to the cyber police,” Anish advised.