NEW DELHI: "I want my daughter to grow up and fight for justice, not feel pity for me," said Kamla, a trafficking and rape survivor. Eyes gleaming with resilience and a smile weighed down by the burden of her experiences, Kamla, who has been fighting for justice for eight years, narrated to TOI her tale of survival on GB Road.
A native of West Bengal, Kamla was 16 years old when she was trafficked from her village to Delhi around 2009.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe teenager didn't even know which part of the country she had been brought to. All she remembers is being moved from one place to another in a sedated state. "When I regained consciousness after many days, I heard someone saying I was at GB Road in Delhi. It was the first time I had heard of the city," Kamla recollected recently.
When Kamla resisted being pushed into commercial sex work, the brothel people treated her brutally. "They beat me mercilessly and starved me. All I remember of my initial years in the brothel is being constantly unconscious and in pain," she said at her one-room rented home in a central Delhi slum.
The exploitation continued for seven years till 2016, until she met Raghavendra (name changed), now 34 years old. "I became acquainted with him at the brothel and he was the first person to show some kindness for me," said Kamla. I narrated my ordeal to him and he promised to help me." However, her hope of making it out of the brothel was dashed when she overheard the plan to traffic her to Mumbai.
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More"I thought if I did not try to escape now, I would spend the rest of my life in the sex trade. When the train started running, I jumped off knowing that was the only way to save myself," she said. Luckily, Railway Police came to her rescue and reunited her with Raghavendra, who now is her husband and crusader in her fight for justice.
The couple filed an FIR, though no one has been arrested till date. "I want my wife to get justice," said Raghavendra, a daily-wage earner. "The case is proceeding at a very slow pace. But our determination hasn't diminished. I sometimes get anxious because I have to take care of my daughter and pay Kamla's medical bills, but I want to put those responsible for my wife's physical condition behind bars."
In 2020, with the help of NGO Brave Souls Foundation, Kamla approached Delhi high court seeking compensation under the Delhi Victim Compensation Scheme. Last year in December, the court directed Delhi State Legal Service Authority to give Kamla the mandatory compensation. While the money came as a relief, Kamla's main focus is still her legal battle. "My daughter is growing older and I am apprehensive of her learning what has happened to me. I want her to know that I fought bravely and inspire her to fight her battles in life as bravely," she said.
The 31-year-old woman continued, "We started a new life. It hasn't been easy. My husband had to leave his family to be with me. Due to the gruesome sexual assault, I have major health problems and am even unable to do household work. My husband provides for the family and does domestic chores too."
Kamla wants Delhi govt to look into her case, hoping this will help fast-track the proceedings and result in punishment for those who pushed her into commercial sex work. The unschooled Kamla has picked up a few English words, all attesting to her long fight. These include 'human rights', 'compromise', 'compensation', 'Justice', and poignantly, 'I will not stop till the end'.