AHMEDABAD: While the authorities of many countries are concerned about illegal immigration, human traffickers are devising new tactics to bypass visa restrictions. A recent US court conviction sheds light on a disturbing new scheme: Orchestrating fake attacks to qualify for an American U-visa, which is granted to foreign nationals who become victims of violence in the US.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Vinay Patel, a man from North Gujarat, allegedly hired individuals to stage a robbery to get a ‘U visa’ (U nonimmigrant status). The method exploits a safety net meant for victims of violent crimes. Piyush Patel, another Indian national from South Gujarat, previously used the same tactic to get a visa before facing legal issues. 
According to the US Citizenship and Immigration Services, a U visa is set aside for victims of certain crimes who have suffered mental or physical abuse and are helpful to law enforcement or government officials in the investigation or prosecution of criminal activity. 
Sources in the human smuggling network said if a foreign national — called an alien in the US — has been attacked or abused on American land, they get a U visa smoothly. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More“Earlier, people from Gujarat would seek asylum on grounds such as land or property disputes in India or citing political, religious or caste-related persecution. People who wanted to seek asylum in the US would fabricate a fight in India, file a police complaint and show it as a reason for seeking shelter. There has been a shift in the trend now,” said a police officer. 
Now, human smugglers would organize a staged crime or attack in the US, added the officer. 
“These people hire someone to commit a robbery or assault which will later mean clear passage to settle in the US for the victim of the violence,” said the officer. 
The United States Attorney’s office for the Middle District of Pennsylvania on December 6 convicted 33-year-old Vinay Patel on multiple counts of visa fraud and conspiracy. 
According to United States Attorney Gerard M Karam, Vinay Patel was the manager of the Fuel-On convenience store in Lock Haven, Pennsylvania. 
“In June 2019, Patel contacted an associate of his in New Jersey and asked that person to hire someone to stage a robbery at the Fuel-On store. After the staged robbery occurred, it was investigated by the Pennsylvania state police. Patel then used the police reports of the robbery to apply for a U visa. Patel had no lawful immigration status in the US at the time of the staged robbery,” Karam said. 
Patel faces a maximum penalty of 25 years of imprisonment in the case, which was investigated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). 
On December 12, a Gujarati man named Ram Patel and a Punjabi man called Balwinder Singh were charged by a federal court with one count of conspiracy for staging an armed robbery to get a U visa. They face five years in jail. 
An investigation by the FBI revealed that Ram and Balwinder had paid $10,000 for the armed robbery at a liquor store in Randolph, a suburban city in Norfolk County, Massachusetts. Both were undocumented residents of the US at the time.