New Delhi: This syndicate of firearms traffickers offered customers the “complete package” — not only did the members allegedly manufacture and supply the weapon of choice, they also customised the design as per the customers’ requirements and made doorstep deliveries. 
The gang would make copies of Berettas and Glocks just by seeing photos. Though they didn’t fire the same way, the copies did have some resemblance.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe syndicate was allegedly using Instagram and Facebook to lure customers. 
Their business was, however, interrupted after Delhi Police got a tip-off about their racket. Cops arrested four of the gang members and busted their makeshift gun-making factory. Ready-to-use and half-made weapons and tools used to make them were seized. 
According to DCP Sanjay Sain, the arrested men have been identified as Osama alias Ashu (23) and Shaquib Mulla (22) from northeast Delhi and Naushad Ansari (29) and Mohammed Amir (29) from Meerut. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteCops nabbed the suspects as part of their drive against illegal firearms traffickers in Delhi-NCR. The operation kicked off after ASI Praveen received information about a man named Osama who was allegedly engaged in sale and purchase of illegal firearms. 
Surveillance was mounted and after the whereabouts of the alleged gang members were ascertained, a team comprising ACP Rohtash and inspector Lichhman was formed. The team conducted a raid in Usmanpur locality and arrested Osama with two pistols and cartridges. 
Osama told police that he had been supplying illegal firearms to gangs in northeast Delhi. He led the cops to his associate Shaquib, who was also arrested in another raid. The duo told cops that they used to purchase weapons from a wholesale dealer, Naushad, who hails from Meerut. Naushad’s arrest led the cops to the alleged manufacturer, Amir. A blacksmith by profession, Amir started making weapons for easy money, said police.
During interrogation, cops found that Naushad and Amir were partners and the former was tasked with arranging customers. Naushad would allegedly take orders on WhatsApp and had two conduits in Delhi to carry out sales. It would cost Amir about Rs 1,500 to prepare a single-shot pistol, which would then be sold in the market for about Rs 10,000. The prices went up with customisations and the quality of pistols. 
With police’s heat increasing on modules based in Sendhwa, Khargone, Dhar and Burhanpur areas of Madhya Pradesh, the syndicate was allegedly making big money by selling weapons through close contacts. 
The suspects have been booked under the amended Arms Act, which has a provision of minimum sentence of 10 years that can be extended to life term, an officer added. Police said they are also looking for other members of the gang.