NEW DELHI: The Central Bureau of Investigation busted a major child trafficking network in Delhi and other parts of the country on Saturday and arrested seven suspects following raids across the city.

The sleuths also saved the lives of three newborns and rescued them during the raids. One of the three was rescued in a real-time operation on Friday night.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoTwo of the rescued infants are just 1.5 days and 15 days old while a girl child is a month old.
The operation is continuing and raids are being conducted in Gorakhpur in UP and Punjab in search of suspects, CBI sources said. The nexus, they said, comprises hospital staff, middlemen and traffickers.
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteAmong those arrested are the two alleged kingpins whom police identified as Neeraj of Sonipat in Haryana and Indu Pawar of Paschim Vihar in Delhi. Neeraj's close associate, Aslam of Patel Nagar, was also arrested.
According to CBI sources, a woman named Anjali of Malviya Nagar who used to scout for potential customers was also arrested. Three other women named Pooja Kashyap, Ritu and Kavita have also been taken in. They took care of the trafficked newborns until the babies were sold to customers.
All the arrested were presented in court on Saturday and remanded to four days in CBI custody.
CBI had activated its information network after chief Praveen Sood's directed a crackdown on trafficking of children. The agency eventually received a tip-off about a racket involved in buying and selling infants across India. After initial leads generated through technical surveillance, CBI caught two suspects selling a child to a couple who wanted to adopt the kid. The newborn had been trafficked from Jaipur, said a source. Rs 5.5 lakh was recovered from the accused and raids were subsequently conducted at several locations on the basis of information collected during interrogation.
CBI sleuths then raided a rented accommodation in northwest Delhi's Keshavpuram and rescued two children from the custody of Kavita and Kashyap. Videos showed the CBI personnel, feeding bottles in their hands, emerging from the house with the newborns, sparking an outrage against the traffickers.
CBI's probe has revealed that the accused advertised on social media platforms and used Facebook pages and WhatsApp groups to connect with childless couples who wished to adopt babies. "They allegedly purchased babies from parents and from surrogate mothers and sold the infants for Rs 4-Rs 6 lakh per child," the CBI spokesperson said. The accused were also duping childless couples of lakhs of rupees by creating fake documents related to adoption in order to give validity to their illegal business.
The agency is recording the statements of the duped parents and suitable legal action will be taken as per the evidence that emerges during the probe, CBI insiders said. The parents of the trafficked kids have been traced and the children will soon be reunited with them after verification, another officer said.
In a statement issued on Saturday, CBI said that it conducted raids at seven locations in Delhi and Haryana while busting the racket. "CBI has registered a criminal case under various penal provisions of the Indian Penal Code besides invoking the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act against 10 people accused of being involved in a network of infant children traffickers buying and selling infants across India for the purpose of adoption as well as for other illegal purposes," the spokesperson said.
CBI is expected to file a chargesheet soon against the accused in the case. More arrests are also likely in the coming days, sources said.