PANAJI: Admission to English-speaking courses, employment in big cities, enrolment in hostels or colleges, and online jobs for those laid off in the Covid-19 aftermath - these are some of the new lures used by human traffickers to ensnare targets.

Expressing concern over the acquittals in human trafficking cases, DGP Jaspal Singh on Friday said that such legal outcomes are analysed and strategies are modified to convict the traffickers.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Speaking at the state-level Conference 2024 on Anti-Human-Trafficking, organised by Goa police and the anti-human-trafficking unit, Panaji, Singh said that the event aims to highlight the persistence of the problem.
"We have to remind ourselves again and again that we have not been able to make a dent in this social evil. As law enforcement officers, we feel the need to ask why we are not able to contain this problem, if not eliminate it," Singh said. "But let me tell you this is not merely a law-and-order problem, not just a crime. It has far-reaching social consequences."
Singh said if human beings are treated like cattle or commodities, the world is not a very kind place.
"This means we are not kind to our own brothers and sisters. Generally in police, the problem is considered to be chiefly associated with the trafficking of women," Singh said. "But it is a very deep-rooted problem in society. Children and labourers are trafficked across the world and many die when they are being taken to other countries. Some die in ships."
The DGP said that the conference has been organised to make people and police officers aware of the fact that the problem is not just a crime, but also a grave social concern. He said police, the political leadership, and other stakeholders must deal with trafficking in a cohesive manner.
Some involved in trafficking claim that the women had willingly come on board. "This is not consented willingness. It is willingness obtained by force and fraud," Singh said. "That is a vitiated willingness. Therefore, we have to go very deep into the problem whenever we investigate cases."