NEW DELHI: Two alleged international human traffickers have been arrested after a year-long hunt by police across several states. 
"Aziza Tanrykulyyeva (36) from Turkmenistan and Sherget (25) from Afghanistan were wanted in multiple cases in Delhi and were the kingpins of an international crime syndicate," said joint commissioner (eastern range) Chhaya Sharma on Sunday. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo

Last year in August, they allegedly abducted a woman from outside the Uzbekistan embassy in the capital where she had reached for help. Around the same time, a video of Aziza thrashing a trafficked woman had gone viral on social media, following which the couple absconded.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreThey remained in hiding in Goa for some months before resuming their operations, police said.
According to Sharma, the accused allegedly trafficked women from CIS (commonwealth of independent states) countries into India and ran a large-scale countrywide prostitution racket.
Deputy commissioner of police (east) Amruta Guguloth said Aziza had come to India from Lebap in Turkmenistan in December 2015 on a tourist visa with a validity of three months. However, she never went back and started living in India illegally. 
She then came into contact with a man named Sameer Sezai in January 2016 and began living with him in Jangpura. In June that year, she allegedly stabbed Sezai during a quarrel and was booked for attempted murder. She was arrested and released on bail after a few weeks. 
In February 2021, she came into contact with Sherget, who had come to India from Afghanistan on a medical attendant visa and had overstayed as well. The duo allegedly got in touch with girls who were staying in India illegally and began running a prostitution racket, police claimed.
The cops began a search for the couple after their involvement in a series of incidents, which were followed by court diktat.
Police said they identified the phone numbers used by the accused and tracked down their location in Calangute in North Goa. "With assistance from the local police, a raid was conducted in Candolim and both of them were nabbed," police said.
They were then produced before a court in Goa and their transit remand was obtained.