DEHRADUN: Amid the crackdown by police against drug menace in the state, the drug traffickers have now changed their modus operandi by having multiple carriers for supplying drugs. 
The development was revealed by one of the senior police officers of the STF who is involved in tackling drug trafficking at state level. 
Speaking to TOI, on condition of anonymity, the officer said that with the increased vigil on drug trafficking, those involved in it are also trying to adopt new ways to evade the dragnet. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
"It is a constant cat and mouse game between the police and drug traffickers. Earlier, there used to be usually one or two carriers from the supply source to the delivery point. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoBut now, that has changed as traffickers have now involved more carriers for one consignment in an attempt to evade police dragnet," said the officer. 
Informing more about the changed tactics of the drug traffickers, the officer further said that the traffickers are now also "using public transport instead of private vehicles." 
"That is because, tracking a private vehicle carrying drugs is comparatively easier than tracking a carrier travelling in a bus. It is because the carriers don't travel in the same bus at a stretch but board different ones to prevent police from tracking them. Apart from this, the traffickers are now also using food delivery agents in the cities to deliver drugs to their customers as it is impractical to check every one of them unless there is a pin-point input," said the officer. 
State director general of police, Ashok Kumar meanwhile said that despite the changing tactics, "police are on their toes to curb drug trafficking in the state." 
"Police seized drugs worth Rs 22.7crore in 2022 and arrested 1,703 accused," said Kumar.