New Delhi: After a year-long manhunt across seven states, Delhi Police's Crime Branch has arrested an alleged international drug trafficker named Shamsher Singh from Telangana. A court had issued a non-bailable warrant against the suspect and he was wanted by several police agencies.
Known as Sherry in the international narcotics world, Singh is allegedly a core member of the drug cartel operating on the Indo-Pakistan border that coordinates the influx of drugs from Afghanistan into Delhi and Punjab through the border, police officers claimed.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Ravindra Singh Yadav, special commissioner of police (Crime), said on Saturday that Sherry's name had cropped up in the interrogation of a few suspects nabbed by police last year. "We arrested Singh’s brother, Mahender Pal, aka MH, last year. Proceedings to declare him an absconder are under way after he went underground," Yadav said.
The Crime Branch had first arrested a drug distributor named Shammi with Rs 22 lakh in cash and 5kg of heroin last year. Six kilograms of a chemical colloquially called DRM powder, used in the adulteration of drugs, was also recovered. "During interrogation, Shammi disclosed that he procured the recovered contraband from one Pankaj alias Sanju Baba. Pankaj, accused in several drug trafficking cases, was also arrested. Pankaj was arrested also by the National Investigation Agency because he was connected with an Afghanistan-based drug module," Yadav added.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreDuring the interrogation of Shammi and Pankaj, the names of brothers MH and Sherry emerged as key players of the cartel. Raids were conducted on their possible hideouts but the duo had gone underground. Later, MH was tracked to Ferozepur and police seized Rs 19.3 lakh in cash and 1.8kg of heroin from him. MH revealed how Sherry had established contact with suppliers from across the border and had been taking delivery of the contraband.
On the basis of disclosures made by MH, the cops mounted surveillance and a team comprising ACP Prabhat, inspector Jasbir and others under DCP Amit Goel was formed to pursue Sherry. Trailing Sherry was difficult because he always used a virtual private network (VPN) to contact his sources, suppliers and receivers. Along with VPN, he used apps like Signal or WhatsApp Business to send encrypted messages. He also changed locations frequently and went to distant places to make online connections, thus dodging the cops.
However, one of the leads showed Sherry's presence around Secunderabad. The team rushed there and nabbed him after a door-to-door survey. During interrogation, Sherry disclosed that in 2009, he and two of his friends were arrested in a case of sexual assault. While in jail, he came in touch with the drug mafia and took to drug trafficking.
The products he sold were very popular among the youth. Police sources said that the accused sold drugs to youngsters after allegedly mixing DRM powder, a medicine used primarily for treating abdominal pain, cramps and contractions. "The powder apparently reduced the after-effects of the drugs when the high faded. This made it a hit among school and college goers," claimed an officer.