NEW DELHI: Cracking down on the human trafficking networks involved in the infiltration of illegal migrants from Bangladesh, including Rohingyas, into Indian territory and their systematic settlement in border and far-off states with forged identity documents, the NIA early on Wednesday carried out pan-India raids covering 55 locations in 10 states.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoAs many as 44 persons who are allegedly part of four human trafficking networks under NIA’s scrutiny were arrested from eight states, with Tripura alone accounting for nearly 50% of the arrests.
The synchronised raids were conducted by NIA teams in close coordination with the Border Security Force (BSF). which guards the Indo-Bangladesh border. and various state police — were spread across Tripura, Assam, West Bengal, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Haryana, Rajasthan, UT of J&K and Puducherry. Five human trafficking modules across as many states were busted, said an officer. Of the 44 arrests made by NIA, 21 were in Tripura, 10 in Karnataka, five in Assam, three in West Bengal, two in Tamil Nadu and one each in Puducherry, Telangana and Haryana. Recoveries included digital devices such as mobile phones, SIM cards, and pen drives; purportedly forged Aadhaar cards and PAN cards; Rs 20 lakh in Indian currency and $4,550.
Wednesday’s raids were in four cases registered at NIA offices in Guwahati, Chennai, Bengaluru and Jaipur. The initial case was registered by the Assam Police's Special Task Force (STF) on September 9 this year, and transferred to NIA on October 6 after investigations revealed pan-India and even international linkages of the human trafficking racket.
While the total number of illegal settlers from Bangladesh in India is not known, an intelligence document dating back to 2017 had put the total number of Rohingyas at around 40,000 then, of which 7,096 were said to be in J&K, 3,059 in Hyderabad, 1,114 in Mewat (Haryana), 1,200 in western UP, 1,061 in Delhi and 400 in Jaipur.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreNIA investigations pointed to modules of this human trafficking network across Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Rajasthan, Haryana and Jammu & Kashmir. Accordingly, three new cases were registered by NIA.
NIA on Wednesday said the early morning clampdown was aimed at dismantling the entire ecosystem of the illegal human trafficking support networks.
India is not a signatory to the 1951 UN Convention relating to the status of refugees and the 1967 protocol. All foreign nationals (including refuge seekers) are governed by the provisions of The Foreigners Act, The Registration of Foreigners Act, Passport (Entry into India) Act and the Citizenship Act, 1955. Foreign nationals who enter into the country without valid travel documents or whose travel documents expire while staying in India are treated as illegal migrants and must be either kept in detention camps or deported.
While the total number of illegal settlers from Bangladesh in India is not known, an intelligence document dating back to 2017 had put the total number of Rohingyas at around 40,000 then, of which 7,096 were said to be in J&K, 3,059 in Hyderabad, 1,114 in Mewat (Haryana), 1,200 in western UP, 1,061 in Delhi and 400 in Jaipur. Central agencies had then warned that a network of touts, mostly based in West Bengal and Assam, was arranging forged identity documents for the Rohingya immigrants upon their illegal entry into India. Some NGOs run by the minority community in West Bengal, it was claimed, were arranging logistics for their stay in camps including at far-off locations in Kerala, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Jammu in J&K and even Andaman & Nicobar.
In 2017, the Centre had asked the states/UTs to detect and report Rohingyas residing in their jurisdiction, for likely deportation proceedings. Another advisory in 2018 sought Rohingya settlers to be confined to specific, identified locations; recording of their personal particulars including biometrics along with their address in Myanmar; and a direction not to issue them Aadhaar or any other document that could help them claim Indian identity.
The NIA sleuths arrested 10 people for alleged human trafficking in Bengaluru. The raids were carried out at 15 houses in Soladevanahalli, Kalkere (Bengaluru Rural), Marathahalli, Begur and surrounding areas.