NEW DELHI: The Central Bureau of Investigation’s probe of a recent child trafficking incident has put the spotlight on the fertility centres, which have mushroomed in the city. With the agency’s probe revealing that the gang involved purchased babies from surrogate mothers, the lens is on clinics that are engaging in illegal fertility services.

Sources said there was a huge underground market flourishing in the garb of IVF centres and the babies trafficked through them or their staffers were at risk of falling into the hands of organised syndicates engaged in organ transplant, begging and other related trades.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
The Surrogacy (Regulation) Act, 2021, prohibits commercial surrogacy, that is, surrogates cannot be paid any remuneration for bearing a child. The law was enacted in response to a surge in unethical practices, including the mistreatment of surrogate mothers and the desertion of children born through surrogacy. The Surrogacy Act restricts access to assisted reproductive technologies (ART) and surrogacy services to specific groups.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More“Only married couples who are unable to conceive naturally are eligible for surrogacy under the legislation. Additionally, the Acts permits only certain categories of women to utilise ART and surrogacy. The sale of gametes and any form of compensation to the surrogate mother, apart from insurance coverage and medical expenses, are strictly forbidden,” an official explained.
Recently, the central govt also asked Punjab govt for a report on slain musician Sidhu Moose Wala’s mother delivering a child following artificial fertilisation.
Police have cracked down several times on illegal IVF centres in the city, including arresting six members of a gang that trafficked newborn babies in April 2022. The gang members stole children and sold them to childless couples. The gang included two female employees working at an IVF centre in Greater Noida. The duo allegedly lured a client by promising a baby boy for adoption through the legal route. After this, the gang contacted a person and fixed the deal. They also prepared forged documents to make it seem like a legal adoption.
In Sept the same year, the owner of an IVF clinic in Greater Noida was arrested. The arrest came after a 34-year-old woman died while undergoing an IVF procedure at the clinic in Eco-Village 2. Police found that the doctor’s medical degree was fake. One of the rackets facilitated a couple’s visits abroad to evade the restrictions in India.
In 2021, another racket was busted in which the cops rescued a two-year-old child and apprehended four people, including a juvenile. The mastermind worked as an egg donor with a hospital in Rajouri Garden. She kidnapped the kid and tried to sell it to a Punjab-based family.
In 2019, the city police busted an IVF clinic that was also running a call centre to connect with and lure couples unable to conceive a child. They offered to send couples wanting a baby boy to countries like Thailand, Singapore and Dubai where sex selection is not illegal. One of the accused who acted as the relationship officer for the gang told people that sex determination was banned in India, so got them to pay Rs 10,000 as registration fee before being sent to Dubai, Bangkok and Singapore under various packages. The same year, a similar setup was busted in Patel Nagar too.