VIJAYAWADA: Andhra Pradesh, which stands second in number of human trafficking cases, is lagging behind in terms of Anti-Human Trafficking Units (AHTUs). 
While Telangana has 30 dedicated AHTUs, AP has only 13 functional AHTUs.

 The concept of AHUTs was introduced in 2006 in India, but the first AHTU in AP was started in 2012. A study conducted by Sanjog, a Kolkata-based voluntary organisation working for human trafficking victims, had revealed that AP had only three functional AHTUs till 2021. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndoThe number of AHTUs later increased to 13. The study found that AHTUs were established at Disha police stations which are actually meant to handle crimes against women.
 Conviction rate in trafficking cases handled by AP is very less as per the findings of the study. The national average of conviction rate was 10.6 % in 2020 and AP registered 8.2 % conviction rate.
AHTUs are meant to exclusively handle cases related to human trafficking. The composition of AHTU is one inspector, two sub-inspectors, two head constables and two constables. 
Apart from the department staff, AHTUs take local NGOs which work for survivors of human trafficking onboard. 
NVS Rammohan, general secretary of Help NGO which deals with human trafficking survivors, said every missing case should first come to AHTU and an initial investigation should be done to identify the human trafficking angle, if any. He opined that the merger of AHTUs with Disha police stations is diluting the concept as the staff there are preoccupied with hundreds of cases related to sexual harassment, domestic violence and others. 
The actual purpose of AHTUs is getting defeated. Government should provide a separate mechanism and provide manpower to exclusively handle cases related to human trafficking, Rammohan said. The study also revealed that AP sanctioned 1.60 crore for the AHTUs and data on the utilisation of the fund is unavailable.