GURGAON: Bodybuilder and 'influencer' Bobby alias Balwant Kataria was arrested by Gurgaon police on Monday on a complaint by a youngster from UP who alleged he was trafficked to Laos after being promised a job in the UAE by Kataria's consultancy firm. 
According to the complaint, there were around 150 Indians whose passports had been seized to threaten them into working at the call centre in the Golden Triangle SEZ in northern Laos, part of a trijunction with Myanmar and Thailand.The workers had to call foreigners, mostly Americans, and hoodwink them in digital frauds. 
A Chinese citizen allegedly operated the call centre. 
The complaint was made less than two weeks after the ministry of external affairs announced that 13 Indians trafficked to Laos were rescued. In April, 17 Indians were rescued from the country.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteThe National Investigation Agency (NIA) said in a statement that Kataria was among five suspects arrested on Monday in a coordinated operation with police across states. 
"Manish Hingu of Vadodara, Pahlad singh of Gopalganj, Nabialam Ray of southwest Delhi, Balwant Kataria of Gurgaon and Sartaj Singh of Chandigarh were arrested following a crackdown at 15 locations in Maharashtra, UP, Bihar, Gujrat, Delhi, Haryana, Punjab and Chandigarh," the statement read.
Eight fresh FIRs were registered in connection with cases of "human trafficking involving forced cyber crimes" across states, NIA said.
The agency added that the accused were found to be "involved in an organised trafficking syndicate engaged in luring and trafficking Indian youth to foreign countries on the false promises of legal employment. The youth were being forced to work in fake call centers at Laos, Golden Triangle SEZ, and Cambodia... coerced into undertaking illegal activities online..."
Gurgaon police said they searched Kataria's office in Sector 109 and his house on Basai road. 
"We have seized incriminating documents and about Rs 18 lakh in cash during the searches. Kataria has been arrested. He will be produced before a court on Tuesday," a senior police officer said.
Kataria (38), cops said, was booked under sections 370 (trafficking of people), 364 (abduction in order to murder), 342 (wrongful confinement), 346 (wrongful confinement in secret), 420 (cheating), 323 (voluntarily causing hurt), 322 (voluntarily causing grievous hurt), 506 (criminal intimidation) and 120-B (criminal conspiracy) of the IPC. Provisions of the Immigration Act were also imposed.
The 'influencer' has been booked in at least three other cases over the past few years. In 2017, Kataria was accused of extortion by a Gurgaon woman. And in 2022, two cases were registered against him - one for an Instagram video in which he was seen smoking inside a passenger plane, and another for a clip that showed him drinking in the middle of a highway in Dehradun. 
Gurgaon cops said they took action after Arun Kumar, a job seeker from UP's Gopalganj, filed a complaint at Bajghera police station in the city.
Kumar told police that he and a friend Manish, from UP's Dholana, approached Kataria in Jan this year after seeing Instagram and YouTube advertisements by Kataria's company MBK Global Consultancy. The ads promised to get youngsters places in jobs in foreign countries.
On Feb 1, Kumar allegedly met Kataria in Gurgaon and was promised a job in the UAE. 
"I then transferred Rs 1.5 lakh into the accounts of MBK Global and Bobby's friend Ankit Shaukin's accounts," Kumar said.
Kumar and his friend then received tickets for Laos capital Vientiane, and boarded the flight on March 28, according to the complaint. He said Manish had transferred Rs 2.5 lakh to Kataria between Jan and March.
In Laos, a man named Abhi - who claimed to be a Pakistani citizen and Kataria's friend - dropped the two youngsters to a hotel and the next day, asked them to board a train to Nateuy in the southeast Asian country, the complaint read.
"At Nateuy station, Abhi got us a taxi to the Golden Triangle, where we were received by Ankit (Shaukin) and Nitish Sharma alias Rocky. They took us to an unnamed company operated by a Chinese man. They forcibly took away our passports and forced us to commit cyber frauds against US citizens by threatening to destroy our passports and kill us," Kumar alleged. 
Kumar and Manish managed to escape from the call centre and returned to India after taking help from the Indian Embassy in Laos.
MEA, while announcing that 30 Indians were rescued in April and May, also issued an advisory warning job seekers not to believe "fake agents" operating in Laos and Cambodia. "So far, embassy has rescued 428 Indians from Lao PDR. We thank Lao authorities for their cooperation," the advisory said.
TOI had reported earlier this month that almost half of the money lost in online frauds was being traced to cybercons in Laos, Myanmar and Cambodia.