Sean 'Diddy' Combs' neighbours are making some rather shocking revelations about what goes on in his gated properties amidst an investigation into an alleged sex trafficking racket and other sex crimes. 
Heavily armed Homeland Security Investigations agents arrived at the music mogul's homes in Los Angeles and Miami earlier in the day with other law enforcement officers and reportedly took 3 people into custody.Two of the men taken away in handcuffs were reportedly the rapper's sons - King and Justin.
Diddy, however, was nowhere to be seen until he was caught on camera at the Miami-Opa Locka Executive Airport. Videos shared by TMZ, saw the rapper, anxiously pacing around after he and his entourage was questioned by Customs agents. However, there has been no report of the rapper being detained. 
Meanwile, as investigating officers raided his plush pad, a video doing the rounds on Twitter saw two men in a car, believed to be Diddy's neighbours, alleging that they had seen 'busses' of women pull up to the house. As the man in the car left his gated home, he was heard saying, "I live right next to him. He do too much."

Amidst the commotion outside the house, the man added, "You see big a** busses, and dude you see all types of s*** hop off. Especially at night time... around 3 o'clock in the morning, it gets wild!"
Back at his California estate, DailyMail.com reported a neighbour by the name of Ryan Mendelsohn, candidly revealing the absurd scenes he'd see late into the night, with scores of beautiful women being brought to the mansion.

'I've seen black Suburbans, Uber drivers, private drivers between 1-3 am - sometimes earlier, sometimes later - but I've seen girls get out of the car in swimsuits, swimwear and bathing suits sometimes,' Mendelsohn told the portal. 
The man said that he had long assumed that the women arriving at the rapper's residence were to attend afterparties following a night of clubbing. Although he never saw Diddy with the women, in the wake of the charges and the raid, he believes the happenings in the mansion will take on a more sinister tone.
Mendelsohn recalled, "You come here in Beverly Hills on a Tuesday night, there's a party going on from 2 am to 5 am. It's not really unexpected but the outcomes of these parties turned out for the worse. It's pretty serious, not respectful towards women and it's good that they're raising awareness for this cause."

In a statement put out to the media, the HSI said that the operations were carried out "as part of an ongoing investigation."
There was no immediate official confirmation about what precipitated the raids.
However, this raid comes at a time when the rapper is at the centre of sex trafficking, rape and sexual assault lawsuits. Currently, there are at least four lawsuits filed against him, with allegations dating back decades.
Combs has denied all allegations against him.
Watch Latest English Official Music Video Song 'Another One Of Me' Sung By Diddy Featuring The Weeknd, 21 Savage And French Montana