New Delhi: A 14-year-old girl, who was kidnapped and trafficked from Bihar, was rescued from a house in north Delhi's Burari. Police said she was confined and forced into prostitution. A couple and another person were arrested in the case.
Police received information about a woman possibly running a prostitution ring from Sadar Bazar in the capital. After developing the information and pinpointing the location, they kept a watch and raided the place on Saturday.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoA minor girl was found confined at the house.
"Our investigation revealed that the girl was forced into prostitution and had been kidnapped from Bihar," an officer said.
Three men — Irshad (30), Sanjary (36), and Hasibul (45) — all from Bihar, were found at the house and apprehended. Irshad, who is believed to have befriended the girl in her village, is suspected of kidnapping her.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MorePolice believe Sanjary and her husband, Hasibul, were involved in confining the girl, bringing in customers to the house and facilitating her engagement in sexual activities.
A case was registered under IPC sections of kidnapping, confinement, trafficking, exploitation of trafficked person, rape, common intention and and violation of Pocso and ITP Acts.
Police said their investigation had revealed that the survivor might have been previously confined to some other house and was being shifted to avoid detection by the cops. "She is an orphan and was abducted from her native place 5-6 months ago. Efforts are on to locate the previous house and identify others involved in the case. Meanwhile, the girl is receiving counseling," police said adding that they were yet to ascertain if a case was registered back home upon her disappearance.
Investigation revealed that the accused had rented a room for the past three months. Police said Sanjary and Hasibul had been staying with the girl. Police are investigating whether the couple is part of a larger human trafficking and prostitution ring. Raids are under way to apprehend their associates, while cops are also trying to trace the girl's family members in Bihar.
Recent NCRB data showed that there were 74 cases of human trafficking and 511 children were victims of trafficking in 2022 in the city.