AHMEDABAD: The Kanbha human trafficking case has taken a darker turn with the recent revelation that one of the accused, Ashok Patel, had informally "adopted" one of his first victims, a minor girl, with the intention of selling her off. 
The victim had lost both her parents at the age of 14. According to a friend of the victim who took her in after her parents' death, Ashok Patel initially gained the girl's trust by posing as a father figure.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
The friend recounts how the victim, Nisha (name changed), referred to Patel as "papa" and believed she had found a haven in him. However, the horrifying truth soon came to light as Ashok subjected her to brutal abuse. He then sold her to so many men that she lost count. When Nisha got fed up with this, he confined her with another girl and tried to kill her," reveals the victim's friend. 
"Patel had told Nisha she could stay with him as a daughter. One day she went to meet Patel and disappeared. A while later, she returned and said that 'papa' had promised to give her a cellphone. In 2015, she disappeared again," said the friend. 
Years later, the friend received a distressing call from a man in Kalol, claiming he was married to Nisha. He asked the friend to take her back. 
"I had Nisha's custody from May 20 to July 2, 2022. However, on Rath Yatra day, she vanished again. She contacted me in the afternoon, claiming Patel had assaulted her," said the friend. 
Upon receiving the call, the friend rushed to Hanspura Crossroads and rescued the girl from a farmhouse. Although the Odhav police filed a complaint of causing grievous hurt, no investigation was conducted into the human trafficking aspect, even though Patel had fractured Nisha's legs and hands, alleged the friend.
The detection of a human trafficking network by Ahmedabad Rural police exposed the lackadaisical approach of police which did not do any detailed investigation against the human traffickers despite three complaints registered against them.