MUMBAI: The charter plane with 303 Indians bound for Nicaragua, that was grounded in Vatry, France for an investigation into human trafficking is expected land in Mumbai in the early hours of Tuesday, said an aviation source. Two Indians have been detained in France and some others have sought asylum and so the aircraft is expected to fly in with about 280 Indians, said a source.
The Airbus A340 (YRLRE), operating Legend Airlines flight LAL-1216, departed Vatry at 4.30 pm (IST), said a source.Though the flying time to Mumbai is about nine hours, the flight is not likely to fly direct to Mumbai, according to data from Flightradar24. The flight is expected to do a transit halt in Fujairah,UAE at 6.30 am (IST). There is no information yet on when the flight will depart from Fujairah to Mumbai.
Last Thursday, the Airbus A340 flight, operated by Romanian charter company Legend Airlines, from UAE to Nicaragua, in central America, was grounded at Vatry airport, in northeastern France, over suspected human trafficking.
The aircraft, which landed in Vatry for a technical stopover, was detained based on an anonymous tip that it was carrying passengers who were considered ``likely victims of human trafficking". On Sunday, the French authorities permitted the aircraft to leave France. Meanwhile, the prefect’s office initiated a judicial investigation with focus on the purpose and conditions under which these passengers were being flown to the central American country. According to media reports, two passengers were detained following interrogation by the French authorities. Other reports said that about four dozen passengers have filed asylum applications.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreThe flight was earlier scheduled to depart for India on Monday, but the departure was delayed after some passengers were reportedly unhappy over their return back to India. Media reports said, they preferred to continue to Nicaragua as planned. All the passengers who have not applied for asylum and who are not in police custody are expected to board the flight to Mumbai. Sources said that the passengers were from different states in India and once they land in Mumbai, they will be questioned by the immigration authorities at Mumbai. “Their first port of call will be Mumbai. When and how they will be put on domestic flights bound for their home states is not known for now,” said the source . According to reports there are 11 unaccompanied minors among the 303 Indians who were bound for Nicaragua.
Currently, the investigation is led by the national anti-organized crime unit. After the aircraft landed in France, the reception area at Vatry airport was transformed into a waiting space with separate beds to ensure optimal passenger accommodation, said reports. A specialised unit from the Paris public prosecution office is investigating potential involvement in organised crime.