Raipur: A minor girl from Chhattisgarh fell prey to human trafficking net when her social media friend allegedly raped her on pretext of getting a job in the Indian Army and sent her to Rajasthan where he sold her for Rs 3 lakh. After months of bearing torture, assault and repeated rape, the 17-year-old was able to make a call to her parents in November 2023 and was subsequently rescued.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
On January 23, 2023 the parents of the minor reported their daughter missing at a police station of Rajnandgaon district. Speaking to TOI, Mohit Garg, Rajnandgaon superintendent of police said that and investigation was initiated and search was launched to find the girl.
“In November, the parents approached the police stating that the girl called them and told that she was somewhere in Rajasthan, in a bad condition. She said that she was being thrashed badly, so much so that her ear drum was damaged. Following this the police team immediately traced the location of the call to Churu in Rajasthan and sent a team there on November 14, 2023,” SP Garg said. The girl was rescued from a house and 22-year-old Sukhram, who held the survivor hostage, was arrested from the spot.
Recently, the police arrested the main accused Premaram Godara, 30, who had befriended the girl via social media account posing to have come from army background and lured the girl on pretext of job. He had posted his pictures in Army uniform and claimed he runs an academy.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreThe minor, in her statement to police, said that she fled home with Premaram on December 4, 2022 to join the force in Bhopal, where Premaram raped her. The accused man then introduced her to his friend, Kailash from Rajasthan, as the man responsible for recruitment.
The survivor told the police that Premaram later handed her over to Kailash and his three relatives — Sukhram Thuger, his brother and father — who took her in a car to Churu in Rajasthan. They had allegedly “bought” her from Premaram for Rs 3 lakh.
The girl, who belongs to a family that is not financially stable, hoped that she would be able to get some money from a job, but to her shock she was forced into a “marriage”. She was made to live as a partner with Sukhram, who repeatedly raped, tortured and thrashed her if she resisted or expressed wish to return home.
She stated that one day, she was somehow able to grab a phone and called her parents, else, “the torture would have continued”.
SP Garg said that after the rescue of the survivor, the police teams had gone to Rajasthan twice in the past three months. They caught hold of Premaram and brought him to Chhattisgarh. During interrogation, Premaram revealed the name of Kailash as his associate and now, the police are trying to nab Kailash.
A case was lodged under sections of the IPC for rape, human trafficking, abduction and unlawfully marrying by deceit causes, and provisions of Pocso Act.
The SP said that police were probing if the accused have links to an organized trafficking net. He said that the minor survivor comes from an OBC background and there’s a provision of compensation of Rs 20,000 and Rs 1.75 lakh, which she will be given soon.
On December 5, TOI had reported on a similar case, where a tribal minor girl from Kabirdham returned home after five years of captivity, forced marriage and repeated rape by a man and his father. She was allegedly trafficked as a minor for Rs 2 lakh by her cousin sister and has a two-year-old son, who is currently with the accused man yet to be arrested.