MANGALURU: Dr P M Nair, former director general of Police, NDRF, said that technology has made human trafficking problems worse as traffickers use the internet to connect and exploit victims, especially children.
"However, there are positive examples like Mizoram's Cyberdome, showing how technology can also help. Initiatives such as Cyberdome highlight the potential of using technology to fight against human trafficking.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoIt's important to find a balance by addressing negative impacts and using innovative technological solutions," he said
He was addressing a workshop on the theme “Voice for Changes: Uniting to Restore Human Dignity,” organized by the Anti-Human Trafficking Club (AHTC), Internal Quality Assurance Cell (IQAC), PG Department of Criminology and Forensic Science, School of Social Work, Roshni Nilaya, in collaboration with Sahodaya Bethany Seva Kendra, Bendur on Saturday.
He talked about the rules concerning trafficking - explaining what the laws are and how they work to prevent and punish trafficking.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MorePaul G Aquinas, Professor of Social Work, PG department cum chairperson- anti human trafficking cell, Mangaluru University, spoke about the concept of human trafficking and shared his experience in taking up three projects on the relevant field in Mangaluru. Further, he also mentioned that many social activists studied in this institution and are doing commendable work in various places. He advised that students of social work should help each other and help the people who are trafficked.
Gururaj, police inspector, Mangaluru South Police Station shared his experience of handling cases regarding human trafficking during his probationary period in Chikkaballapur in 2007. He spoke about the importance of POCSO Act 2012 and the difficulties the Police department had faced before its implementation.
On this occasion MoU was signed between the School of Social Work and the Sahodaya Bethany Seva Kendra for the mutual academic pursuit such as extension services, out-reach programme, skill development programme, training, research and other related areas.
Jenis Mary, vice-principal, School of Social Work, in her presidential address stressed upon the importance of lending hands to those children who are in need of care and protection. She also shared her experience participating in the training programme for the anti-human trafficking at Hyderabad. She appreciated the efforts taken by the organizing team of the workshop. She acknowledged the services provided by the Sahodaya Bethany Seva Kendra And assured the support of the institution to work collaboratively.
Meera Mathew, president Amrat Talitha Kum India, Jacinta D’Souza, former principal of the institution, Prof Evelyn Benis, secretary institute of social services, Colin D’Souza, director of family service agency, Niketh P S asst professor, post graduate department of criminology and forensic science, Amra student coordinator of AHTC, teaching and non-teaching faculties of the college, Student representative of nine colleges of Dakshina Kannada district were present on this occasion.