AHMEDABAD: Dingucha resident Mahendra Patel - the elder brother of Jagdish Patel, who, along with his wife and two children, froze to death near the US-Canada border last January - has reportedly fled to the US to avoid being arrested for his alleged involvement in human trafficking case. He is accused of illegally sending nine people from Gandhinagar, Mehsana, and Sabarkantha to the US in February.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoAll of them went missing en route.
The case came to light when the wife of one of the missing persons filed a police complaint on July 12, alleging that Mahendra had cheated her and others in the name of settling them in the US.
A senior police officer from Sabarkantha revealed, "During the probe, we found that Mahendra, known as Mahendra Dingucha or MD, fled to the US in February itself. The family members of a missing person had abducted and assaulted Mahendra to obtain information about their relative's whereabouts. Following this, he fled to America, probably on a fake passport and visa. Two foreign agents involved may have given shelter to Mahendra in the US."
The officer added, "Mahendra was connected to a human trafficking ring that was under investigation for facilitating his brother Jagdish's illegal journey to the US. He was on the radar of the city crime branch and the state monitoring cell (SMC).
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo"He used to obtain fake visas and passports for others. He got one for himself as well and travelled illegally to the US. By the time a look out circular was issued against him in July after an FIR was filed with Prantij police, he had already left the country."
Chetna Rabari, the wife of Bharat Rabari, one of the missing persons, had accused Mahendra and his alleged aide Divyesh Patel alias Johnny from Mehsana of being involved in a human smuggling racket.
‘Mahendra was already under scanner after brother’s family froze to death’
Chetna Rabari, the wife of Bharat Rabari, one of the missing persons, had accused Mahendra and his alleged aide Divyesh Patel alias Johnny from Mehsana of being involved in a human smuggling racket. She said that the nine individuals, including two women, had left for the US on January 8 and were unreachable on February 4. They included four persons from Mehsana, three from Gandhinagar and one each from Sabarkantha and Kheda.
“They were taken to Domi nica in the West Indies before being moved to Martinique, from where they were to take a boat to Puerto Rico on February 4, and then fly to Miami. According to Chetna, each paid Rs 20 lakh to Mahendra before embarking, with the rest to be paid on reaching the US,” an investigator said.
Sources privy to the developments said the nine missing persons are believed to be in the French territory of Guadeloupe. Three of their relatives have moved the Gujarat high court, seeking directions to the Indian authorities to help bring back the missing individuals. The ministry of external affairs has pledged to find them.
According to local sources in Gandhinagar and Mehsana villages, Mahendra Patel used to smuggle people through the Canada route. “After the death of his brother’s family, he shifted to the sea route from the Caribbean, which was popular two decades ago. Human smugglers abandoned that route for the Canada and Mexico routes as it was quite time-consuming,” the officer revealed.
“Mahendra was already under the lens after his brother Jagdish, 39, his wife Vaishali, 37, and their two children—11-year-old daughter Vihangi and 3-year-old son Dharmik—were found frozen to death near the US border in -35°C temperatures on January 19, 2022,” the officer added.
Mahendra and his wife had got emergency visas for the last rites in Canada. When they landed in Calgary, they were detained over fears that they would “sneak into the US”. They were put on a flight back to India.