Following the raids on Sean 'Diddy' Combs' residences as part of a sex trafficking investigation, a new video believed to have been taken from inside the rapper's property has now gone viral online.
TMZ released video footage purportedly showing the aftermath of Monday's raid on Diddy's Holmby Hills property. The footage reveals drawers strewn on the floor, opened safe boxes, scattered clothing and belongings, and documents scattered about the room.

According to reports on Tuesday, Homeland Security agents confiscated several electronic gadgets.The video clip also provides a glimpse of the electronic equipment, including computers and hard drives, cleared out from what appears to be a computer room.

The rapper's lawyer, Aaron Dyer, retaliated against the federal agents in a statement issued to US media. Dyer expressed dismay, stating, "Yesterday, there was a gross overuse of military-level force as search warrants were executed at Mr. Combs' residences. There is no excuse for the excessive show of force and hostility exhibited by authorities or the treatment of his children and employees."
Dyer further clarified that the Bad Boy Records founder, who currently faces five lawsuits accusing him of sexual assault, "was never detained but spoke to and cooperated with authorities" throughout the ordeal. "Despite media speculation, neither Mr. Combs nor any of his family members have been arrested, nor has their ability to travel been restricted in any way," added the lawyer.

On Monday, Combs' properties in Miami and Los Angeles were raided by federal authorities, a month after the music mogul was sued for sex trafficking and other allegations.
In a statement, a representative for Homeland Security Investigations New York explained that the raids were conducted "as part of an ongoing investigation, with assistance from HSI Los Angeles, HSI Miami, and our local law enforcement partners."

The raids occurred approximately one month after Combs was served with a sexual assault lawsuit from producer Rodney "Lil Rod" Jones, who accused the music mogul of harassment and trafficking. This complaint marked the fifth lawsuit filed against the rapper since his former longtime partner Cassie, whose real name is Casandra Ventura, sued him in November for sexual assault.
In a statement this February, Combs's lawyer Shawn Holley dismissed Jones' claims of assault and trafficking as "pure fiction." Following these allegations, Combs resigned as chairman of Revolt, and his Hulu reality show was subsequently cancelled.
Watch Latest English Official Music Video Song 'Another One Of Me' Sung By Diddy Featuring The Weeknd, 21 Savage And French Montana