JAIPUR: Drug trafficking and peddling in the city are increasingly being dominated by the millennials.
In 2019, the city police launched "Operation Clean Sweep," a citywide ongoing drive aimed at rooting out drug suppliers and their networks.
An analysis of the crackdown results highlights that youths belonging to the age groups of 18 to 25, and 26 to 40 are the most active participants in narcotics peddling.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
The highest number of drug peddlers, both males and females, belonged to the age group of 26 to 40 years, with 841 males and 167 females arrested from that age bracket.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoPolice analysis has revealed that 727 males in the age group of 18 to 25 were arrested in NDPS cases, while 79 females in the same age group were also apprehended for the same crime. In the same operation, 20 minors were also detained. The city police have reported that in their ongoing efforts against the drug trade, they have arrested 1,828 males and 331 females in a total of 1,718 cases related to the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (NDPS) Act.
Police reports have shed light on another troubling aspect of the narcotics issue. It has been observed that drugs are predominantly consumed by the youth, those hailing from impoverished and unemployed backgrounds within low-income communities, often residing in slums. Their drug of choice, in many cases, is seen to be smack. In contrast to their peers from less privileged backgrounds, middle-class youngsters pursuing professional and technical courses, such as engineering, have been found to lean towards a different array of narcotics. Their drug consumption habits include substances like ganja, cocaine, brown sugar, charas, intoxicating tablets, and syrups, among others.
Police said that as part of the ongoing operation against drug and drug peddlers, they have also seized money worth over crores from the accused.