Vadodara: Dahod Police investigating the human trafficking case is trying to ascertain if the accused were involved in similar crimes earlier. Investigations have revealed that the girl who was deserted by her lover had landed in the hands of the accused. 
The girl was abducted by Gram Rakshak Dal (GRD) jawan Lilesh Charpot in December 2022. Charpot had promised to keep the girl as his wife and had asked her to go to Surat where he would meet him.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoCharpot never went to Surat and the girl was spotted at the bus stand there by Satyam alias Rahul Singh who took her to a hotel and raped her.
According to Dahod police, so far it has emerged that Charpot was not linked to the flesh trade racket. “His mistake was kidnapping the girl and then not mustering the courage to accompany her. Had Charpot gone with her as promised, the girl would not have ended up in a flesh trade racket,” said Dahod superintendent of police Dr Rajdeepsinh Zala.
Similarly, while Satyam was not a part of the racket, he had seen the girl alone at the bus stand in Surat and lured her to accompany him. He raped her and left her at Udhna railway station. From there, the girl was dragged into commercial sex work. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteIt was Anandsingh Thakur, a Surat resident belonging to UP, who spotted the girl at the station. “He took her to Poojadevi alias Sariya Pathan. She was involved in commercial sex work under the garb of a beauty parlour. Anandsingh was in a live-in relationship with her and used to help her in her business,” said Zala. They then took her to Varanasi after five days and pushed her into flesh trade there.
After seven months, the duo handed over the girl to Virendrasingh Yadav, an electrician, who sexually exploited the girl before handing her over to Akanksha alias Shabhambano Pathan who made the girl do commercial sex work for 10 months. Pathan too was involved in commercial sex work under the guise of a beauty parlour.
The girl was then sent to Dahod by Pathan with Yadav. The police contacted the girl at her aunt’s place in Dahod where she was staying. Dahod police started tracking Yadav and once he was held, the other accused too landed in the police net. The only accused at large now is Charpot who had abducted the girl. 
Police are now investigating if the accused were involved in similar incidents earlier. “We will be questioning them in this regard and gathering more information,” said Zala.