MUMBAI: Following up on a tipoff about a 58-year-old woman from Kemps Corner in south Mumbai frequently travelling to Pune in luxury buses or private taxis late at night, the Anti-Narcotics Cell (ANC) of Mumbai Police busted a drug trafficking gang of seven, including two Nigerian nationals.
Police claimed that the gang was run by Succerino Fernandes, a former teacher, and her 33-year-old son Quinton.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoTheir interrogations led to the arrest of Mahim resident Anju Vijay Pal and Nigerian nationals Vincent Ogbonna Ezima and Hyancinth Uzolgwe who lived with her. Another ANC team travelled to Pune and arrested Aniket Pardeshi and Gautam Waghela, whom Sukorini allegedly supplied drugs. A team carried out searches at Sukhorino's Kemps Corner residence, and other premises at Marve Road in Malad, Virar, and Pune and recovered 58gm of mephedrone and 15gm of cocaine worth over Rs 16 lakh.
"Our Ghatkopar unit received specific information that a woman, later identified as Succerino, would travel in late-night buses or taxis to ferry drugs to Pune. Officers studied her movements and conducted a technical analysis and found that she would travel to Pune and Goa and return the same night. This raised suspicion and a trap was laid. On July 10, around 12.30am, when Succerino was about to take a taxi from Dadar to go to Pune, we intercepted her and carried a search and found a few grams of MD and cocaine on her," said a police officer.
Succerino was taken to the ANC office and questioned. Quinton too was summoned. He prima facie admitted to be part of the drug trafficking syndicate. The mother-son duo was then arrested, said Prakash Jadhav, deputy commissioner of police (ANC). 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteDuring interrogation, Succerino told police that she was a teacher, but quit her job due to her husband's ill health. She said her husband used to rent out a fishing trawler and signboards. After his death in 2019, she was facing a financial crisis when she met Pal while returning from Goa in a luxury bus. Succerino said Pal offered her a "business of ferrying crystals". "Initially, Sukhorino thought they were real crystals but later realized that it was drugs. As she was in need of money, she started buying MDMA and cocaine from Pal and supplying them to clients in Pune and Goa. To avoid police detection, she would travel alone in buses or taxis at night," said another police officer.
Police said that the gang has been into drug trafficking for the last two years. All seven accused were booked under the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, and produced before the Esplanade metropolitan magistrate's court which remanded them to police custody.