NEW DELHI: Survivors of child trafficking along with child rights organisations have written to Prime Minister Narendra Modi seeking a "comprehensive law" to end human trafficking in the country.
The survivors, who were victims of child sexual abuse, prostitution and slavery, appealed for an end to the practice of human trafficking.
In their written appeal, the survivors have sought the intervention of all stakeholders, including government organisations, judiciary, civil society organisations, funding agencies, community groups and individuals, to come together and take collective action.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Speaking at the recently concluded two-day National Consultation to Combat Human Trafficking, Trisha Roy, a survivor of trafficking, said: "We need access to proper mental health facilities, which is not provided to us when we are rescued. We are never at fault but people treat us like we are the perpetrators. Every day is a challenge for us to fight for our rights. We need speedy court trials to ensure that traffickers are prosecuted for crimes committed by them."
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoAnother survivor, Naziya Begum, said: "After we are rescued, we are scared of the way society and our family will treat us. We need officers to be sensitised to treat trafficking survivors sensitively and ensure proper support once they are rescued."
Another trafficking survivor from Bihar, Mohd Chhotu, said: "Access to proper rehabilitation schemes is essential. For us having access to freedom is important."
The two-day meet was organized by the NGO Shakti Vahini and Delhi National Commission for Protection of Child Rights, in partnership with Kailash Satyarthi Children's Foundation, Bachpan Bachao Andolan, India Child Protection Fund and Prajwala.