NEW DELHI: Eight years ago, Pihu, on her way home from school with her friend, stopped at a roadside food vend. Soon after, both felt dizzy and lost consciousness. 
When they woke up, the two girls found themself on a train. Unlike thousands of others, Pihu was rescued in Delhi by social workers.
On World Day against Trafficking in Persons on Sunday, human-rights groups will pay special attention to children gone missing in Delhi and will demand better enforcement of law to protect kids.
According to the latest data presented in the Rajya Sabha, 3,117 went missing in Delhi between July 1 last year and June 30 this year. Delhi Police data also shows that more children went missing this year than last year, with 2,265 missing this year than 2,164 last year up to May 15. While 1,492 of them have been rescued this year, 1,366 were reunited with their families last year.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreRohima, now 25, was kidnapped from her village when she was 12 years old. She says, "I was then pushed into sex work for five years in Pune, until I managed to run away from there." Rohima, who now is a part of Indian Leadership Forum Against Trafficking, added, "Even after I was reunited with my family, it took me years to get on my feet. I do not want other children to go through my experience."
Police have to tighten the process, as Rohima said, "The cops have to ensure that a missing person complaint is investigated within 24 hours of its filing."
Rishi Kant of Shakti Vahini, a voluntary organisation fighting human trafficking said there definitely has been an increase in cases of missing children, but it was not necessary that every missing child ended up getting trafficked. However, he quickly added, "We also don't deny that the majority of missing children being trafficked is a probability. Therefore, law enforcement agencies must concentrate on a strong inter-state convergence & coordination to intervene in cases of missing children."
Kant said there was an urgent need to develop intelligence and monitoring of habitual traffickers to strengthen police investigations. "Regular raids must be specially conducted in red light areas, from where regular exploitation for commercial sex is reported," he said.
Several survivors of trafficking highlighted low conviction rate in cases related to the crime in Delhi. In 2021, the Union home ministry shared statistics on trafficking cases in Parliament, according to which Delhi has a low 40% conviction rate.