ROME: Italian police on Tuesday said they had targeted 142 suspected members of the 'Ndrangheta mafia in raids, including clans involved in drug trafficking and historically based in the southern city of Cosenza.
Some 109 people were detained following the dawn raids that involved Carabinieri federal police, local forces, and specialist officers from the economic crimes unit, headed by anti-mafia prosecutors from the southern coastal city of Catanzaro, police said.PollDo you think Joe Biden will drop out of the US presidential race?YesNo
Those arrested were members of the well-known Lanzino-Patitucci and Zingari family clans from Cosenza, a city in Calabria. An official from Italy's customs and financial police was also arrested during the operation. Another 20 people were placed under house arrest and 13 more were subjected to other restrictive measures.
The group is suspected of various offences, including being members of the 'Ndrangheta, "drug trafficking aggravated by mafia association" and other offences, according to police. Vincenzo Capomolla, Catanzaro's public prosecutor, told reporters that mafia groups were "asphyxiating" Cosenza's shopkeepers and business people through extortion.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteTheir main activity was drug trafficking, however, sometimes using children, he added. 
"Drug trafficking was one of the ways the 'Ndrangheta exercised control over the territory," he said.
"Only people authorized by the 'Ndrangheta could traffic drugs.
"Anyone engaged in unauthorized trafficking was punished -- financially and physically," he said.
The 'Ndrangheta is based in Calabria, a poor region located at the tip of southern Italy.
It is one of the richest and most powerful of the country's mafia clans, thanks namely to its quasi-monopoly on the European cocaine trade.
It has a presence in around 40 other countries and has a suffocating hold on Italy's local government administration and general population.