Chandigarh: The Haryana assembly on Wednesday passed ‘The Haryana Registration and Regulation of Travel Agents Bill, 2024’ to check and monitor unlawful and fraudulent activities of travel agents.
Travel agents found indulging in human trafficking may face imprisonment up to 10 years and a fine of Rs 5 lakh and the penalty will be doubled for repeated offences.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Nobody in the state would be able to undertake the profession of a travel agent unless registered by the state authorities once the bill becomes a law after its notification.
All those found operating as travel agents in the state without registration may be imprisoned up to a seven-year jail term and a fine of up to Rs 5 lakh. The registration certificate to be valid for three years would be issued only after the verification of documents by the police and can be renewed further. The registration can be cancelled if the agent is found involved in human smuggling or preparation of forged documents. Those who want to surrender the registration would have to publish about their intention of closure of office or branch in local newspapers.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreAny executive magistrate not below the rank of sub-divisional magistrate (SDM) or a police officer not below the rank of DSP would have the power to search the premises of travel agents to check any illegality. The registration would be done through a centralised portal.
While explaining the object behind such a statute, Anil Vij, home minister, Haryana, said innocent and unemployed youth of Haryana were being lured into traps of illegal immigration on a large-scale through illegitimate means. “Unscrupulous and unregistered travel agents deceive such persons by promising easy and quick immigration to foreign countries. The agents promise to arrange work visas, work permits and study visas through offer letters from universities and colleges in foreign countries, but in many cases, they fail to deliver on their promises,” he said.
What if offender is firm
If the person committing any offence punishable under this new law is a company, every person, who at the time of the commission of the offence, was in-charge of, and responsible to the company for the conduct of its business, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Human smuggling
The new statute clarifies that human smuggling shall mean and include illegal exporting, sending or transporting a person out of India or any type of facilitation thereto by receiving money from him or his parents, relatives or any other person interested in his welfare, by inducing, alluring, deceiving or cheating.
Fresh registration for opening branch
If a person who has obtained a registration certificate under this Act for profession of travel agent subsequently opens another office or its branch at a place in the same or other district, he shall be required to obtain a fresh registration certificate for it.
Surge in cheating cases
Haryana has witnessed many youngsters from the state, especially Karnal, Kaithal, Panipat and Kurukshetra, being cheated by travel agents for foreign dreams. Because of limited job opportunities, they are even choosing to adopt illegal ways, falling prey to immigration frauds.