PANAJI: Five washing machines buzz continuously in a large laundry unit on the first floor of a building in Kharewado, Vasco. In another room, several women are busy ironing and sorting. 
At first glance, this 150sqm unit, spread across four rooms in a nondescript building in the port town, could be any large laundry operation in Goa or beyond.
Except that it isn't, as all the women employed here are rescued victims of commercial sex exploitation.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoWhile this one is already running, Anyay Rahit Zindagi (ARZ), the organisation that set it up, hopes to engage 100 women to do this work in a year's time.
The project, called WISH (Women's initiative for self-help), wants to set up 10 such laundries across the state, so that women rescued from sex trafficking get the opportunity to work in their respective places of residence.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreARZ's founder Arun Pandey said that during its work, the organisation felt that along with rescue of victims and prosecution of offenders, it is also important to provide livelihood to victims of sex trafficking to enable their exit from commercial sexual exploitation and prevent re-trafficking.
A woman working at the unit said that no one wants to "be in prostitution", but it's a lack of alternatives that forces people to continue in it.
I’m excited. I have got my life back. Now, I want to live’
We know that it is not good for us and our children, but women continue in this as no one wants to give us jobs," she said.
"Initially, I was hesitant, but my children and other girls working at WISH encouraged me. Now, I have been working at WISH for a year. I am now going to work in the laundry unit and will be involved in collection and delivery. I am very excited with the restarting of the laundry unit. At WISH, I have got my life back. Now, I want to live!"
This marks the first time since the Covid-19 pandemic that former commercial sex workers are being employed for laundry services. SwiftWash, a similarly-staffed mechanised laundry unit that ran for 15 years in Sancoale, had to shut shop during the pandemic.
Most of its business came from hotels, some of which also shut down during Covid-19.
During its decade-and-a-half run, SwiftWash provided employment to 1,500 victims in Goa.
"I was trafficked at the age of 15 by my boyfriend from Maharashtra, and sexually exploited," Priya (name changed) told TOI. "I was rescued by Goa police when I was 23. By then, I was addicted to alcohol and had three children. I was counselled by Arz (Anyay Rahit Zindagi) members and I decided to leave prostitution. They provided me with a job at their SwiftWash laundry unit and admitted my children to a boarding school."
There are many like Priya in Goa. The Goa State Aids Control Society (GSACS) said that there are around 4,000 girls and women engaged in commercial sexual activities.
Laundry services aren't the only offerings under WISH. It also has set up a paper products production unit for making paper bags, tissue paper, and toilet rolls.
It has also been making handicrafts and upcycling clothes. It currently provides livelihood to around 35 victims of commercial sex exploitation, and in the past 20 years, has successfully provided livelihood to around 2,500 victims of sex trafficking in Goa.