WWF and our partners are pursuing two initiatives united by a shared vision for a sustainable future Namibia is a pioneer of nationally recognized, legally secured, community-led conservation. To ensure that those successes can expand in scale and impact, WWF and our partners are pursuing two initiatives united by a shared vision for a sustainable future. For almost three decades, Namibians have bound conservation to people’s well-being, and since the 1990s have put 45% of the country under some form of conservation management. Nearly half of that land falls under communal conservancies. And funding the protection and management of these areas is a massive challenge. “We always had this big dream for community conservation in Namibia, but we never knew how to sustain it financially—until we started looking at project finance for permanence,” says Patricia Skyer. She began working in community-based natural resource management in Namibia in 1996 and is now WWF-Namibia’s project finance for permanence (PFP) program director. PFPs bind conservation-focused policy changes and funding together in a single agreement. To do this, future costs are modeled, shared commitments are negotiated and recorded, and financial pledges are managed transparently according to legally binding rules. The inclusive and holistic approach helps minimize conflicts of interest, the risk of shifting agendas, and the short-term funding cycles that can derail large-scale and long-term conservation. As with all PFPs, “Namibia for Life” is based in Namibians’ self-identified conservation needs and priorities and will build on the country’s many successes—in this case, long-term support to Namibia’s 86 communal conservancies. Still under development, Namibia for Life is intended to bolster the financial security of the conservancies by expanding community tourism and other nature-based opportunities, and by fostering peaceful coexistence between people and wildlife. It will also support new conservancies, as they are created and where appropriate, and vastly increase the resources available to support this people-forward, locally driven approach. “Wildlife in Namibia is thriving not only because others say animals are important but because the people of Namibia value them,” Skyer says. “It’s important to me that the world understand what rural communities with wildlife are willing to sacrifice, not just to benefit themselves, but for all of us.” View all issues h