Forests cover approximately one-third of the Earth's surface and are home to more than three-quarters of the world’s life on land. Further, forests serve as carbon sinks, protect watersheds, reduce the risk of natural disasters such as landslides and flooding, and provide livelihoods for billions of people across the globe. But the world’s forests continue to decline at an alarming rate. To combat the threats facing forests, WWF’s Russell E. Train Education for Nature (EFN) program established an initiative in 2011 to support reforestation and restoration projects around the globe. With funding from The UPS Foundation, EFN has awarded an average of 14 Reforestation Grants a year to non-governmental organizations, community groups, national parks, and academic institutions working in critical areas and countries. Throughout the years, supported projects have focused on key activities from connecting corridors and improving degraded lands to restoring watersheds and expanding forest cover. To date, EFN has successfully worked with over 100 local organizations in Africa, Asia, and Latin America who have planted and restored nearly 2.4 million trees while also improving livelihoods, enhancing local capacity, and strengthening overall biodiversity targets. Below are just three of the outstanding organizations working to restore the world’s forests. In the Andean highlands, where FCT works, the original forest cover has been severely fragmented, but remnant forests can still be found on steep slopes, inaccessible areas, and higher elevations. These lands belong to agricultural cooperatives, communities, haciendas, and small-scale farmers. Thus, the landowners of these properties are key to the survival of the remaining forests and the biodiversity they contain. The Mida Creek Marine Reserve is a vital ecosystem along the coast of Kenya that houses a unique array of habitats such as mangrove forests, seagrass meadows, and mudflats in addition to countless animal species. Most of the local communities surrounding the creek depend on it for food and income, but in recent years mangrove deforestation has threatened to destabilize the creek ecosystem, putting livelihoods in danger. COBEC set out to not only restore mangrove forests in Mida Creek, but to also ensure community-based organizations in the region had the necessary resources to ensure mangrove survival in the long term. Their EFN-supported project planted over 14,600 mangroves and trained over 30 individuals from community organizations on sustainable mangrove restoration and monitoring. COBEC plans to further build upon this work by educating communities on the importance of mangrove restoration and exploring alternative livelihoods. “Our hope in cross-partnering with local communities and lead agencies is to instill a sense of ownership, stewardship, and pride.” - Edward Mwamuye, Executive Director, COBEC EFN’s reforestation program shows this work cannot be done by one person, organization, or country. It requires holistic collaboration across sectors, communities, and individuals. By working with locally-led organizations to address forest restoration challenges, WWF and The UPS Foundation are contributing to long-lasting conservation impacts that support biodiversity and enhance the livelihoods of local and Indigenous communities.