Crowdsourcing climate data in Zimbabwe Farmer and village head George Shoko, from Chisuma village near Victoria Falls in Zimbabwe, clearly remembers the last big thunderstorm he experienced. It was 11 years ago, and it caused flooding. Now, he says, there is less rain each year, it falls later than before, and the weather seems hotter. “We no longer practice rainmaking ceremonies. Survival is uncertain. Some of us have even stopped farming altogether,” he observes. His home in Zimbabwe’s Matabeleland North Province lies within the Kavango-Zambezi Transfrontier Conservation Area (KAZA), the five-country expanse that’s been formed to protect biodiversity while supporting people who live in the landscape. It is not far from the Zambezi River, but despite the volume of water that flows over Victoria Falls and through the gorge below, it is a water-scarce area, and there is no direct access to the Zambezi River, which lies across the gorge. “[Around Victoria Falls], people walk between three and 12 miles for water. Sometimes, they encounter elephants on the way. We lost three people in our community last year due to conflict with elephants,” says Charlene Hewat, director of the nonprofit organization Greenline Africa Trust. Hewat has been working with WWF to collect data on how people living around Victoria Falls experience climate change. As part of WWF’s Climate Crowd program, the effort informs pilot projects to help rural communities adapt, while reducing pressure on biodiversity. According to Nikhil Advani, WWF’s director for climate, communities and wildlife, while we know that most of southern Africa experiences a single rainfall season between October and April, there is a lack of good weather data on Africa in general, and this in turn influences our ability to develop suitable climate projections. However, it’s considered very likely that Africa will continue to warm during the 21st century, and there is some confidence in projections suggesting reduced rainfall during southern Africa’s winter months. “Perhaps of greater importance are observed weather patterns we are already seeing,” he says. “As is the case through much of sub-Saharan Africa, seasonality of rainfall is shifting considerably, and this, along with climate extremes such as drought, is likely to have the most significant impact on communities in the KAZA region, including around Victoria Falls.” View all issues h