The word chaco stems from the Quechua word chaku, meaning "hunting land"—a testament to the Gran Chaco's wildlife, which supported indigenous peoples long before European settlers arrived. The region also contains an array of wildlife and landscapes, from dry mountain grasslands to woody forests to palm stands. Ceratophrys cranwelli Epicrates cenchria Lama guanicoe Rhea americana Tapirus terrestris Myrmecophaga tridactyla Pediolagus salinicola Catagonus wagneri Panthera anca Tolypeutes matacus Sarcaramphus papa Alouatta caraya Jabiru Mycteria Nyctibius griseus Blastocerus dichotomus Chrysocyan brachyurus Alecturus risora Hydrochoerus hydrochaeris Leopardus pardalis Acanthochelys pallidipectoris Caiman latirostris From the western limit of the Dry Chaco. Characterized by dry forests that grown on mountainsides. In higher altitudes, the forest gives way to steppes. Not much of the subregion remains. Covers the southwest portion of the Dry Chaco. Its location east of the Andes and far from the Atlantic isolates it from the humid winds. This area is very dry and contains salt flats, along with smaller, less diverse forests than those in the Humid Chaco. Contains the most extensive forests in the Gran Chaco. Before wide-ranging logging took place in the Semi-Arid Chaco, its dominant trees were the red quebracho and white quebracho. Growing on the highest grounds in the Semi-Arid and Humid Chaco are wooded areas called quebrachales. (The region is generally flat, although some areas sit lower than others.) The quebrachales are dominated by large red quebrachos, which can grow to almost 80 feet tall. Sit on slightly lower ground than quebrachales and grasslands. These areas are dominated by a variety of grasses and Copernicia alba, a palm species that can grow up to 80 feet tall. In periods of heavy rain, these grasslands and palm groves partially flood; in dry periods, they suffer wildfires. Located along raised patches of ground around rivers and wetlands called albardónes. (Albardón means "pack-saddle," a shape these raised areas resemble.) The tallest trees grow on the highest grounds, and shorter trees grow on slightly lower grounds. Found in areas with sandy or humid soil. These areas shelter a wide variety of native plant and animal species—including maned wolves, whose long legs allow them to see prey over tall grasses. Found in the lowest zones of the Humid Chaco, where the ground stays covered in water almost year-round and hinders the growth of trees. These areas shelter an enormous quantity of aquatic plant and animal species. From the western limit of the Dry Chaco. Characterized by dry forestes that grown on mountainsides. In higher altitudes, the forest gives way to steppes. Not much of the subregion remains. Covers the southwest portion of the Dry Chaco. Its location east of the Andes and far from the Atlantic isolates it from the humid winds. This area is very dry and contains salt flats, along with smaller, less diverse forests than those in the Humid Chaco. Contains the most extensive forests in the Gran Chaco. Before wide-ranging logging took place in the Semi-Arid Chaco, its dominant trees were the red quebracho and white quebracho. Growing on the highest grounds in the Semi-Arid and Humid Chaco are wooded areas called quebrachales. (The region is generally flat, although some areas sit lower than others.) The quebrachales are dominated by large red quebrachos, which can grow to almost 80 feet tall. Found in areas with sandy or humid soil. These areas shelter a wide variety of native plant and animal species—including maned wolves, whose long legs allow them to see prey over tall grasses. Sit on slightly lower ground than quebrachales and grasslands. These areas are dominated by a variety of grasses and Copernicia alba, a palm species that can grow up to 80 feet tall. In periods of heavy rain, these grasslands and palm groves partially flood; in dry periods, they suffer wildfires. Located along raised patches of ground around rivers and wetlands called albardónes. (Albardón means "pack-saddle," a shape these raised areas resemble.) The tallest trees grow on the highest grounds, and shorter trees grow on slightly lower grounds. Found in the lowest zones of the Humid Chaco, where the ground stays covered in water almost year-round and hinders the growth of trees. These areas shelter an enormous quantity of aquatic plant and animal species. View all issues h