Too often, women’s impact in conservation—and beyond—has been overlooked. But the truth is, conservation is not possible without women—from different walks of life and different parts of the world. So, for this issue of our magazine, we asked 11 WWF women staff members to interview* or write odes to women conservationists who inspire them. We have a lot of work to do to achieve gender parity in our field, but we wanted to take this moment to share how far we’ve come. *Interviews have been edited for length and clarity. Martinez is placing communities at the center of environmental policies. Cecilia Martinez has spent her life focused on one mission: ensuring that all communities have the right to a healthy environment. Racial inequity and poverty have an adverse impact on public health and the environment. Numerous studies have shown that communities of color, Indigenous peoples, and low-income communities suffer a heavier burden than others from air pollution and lack of access to healthy foods and green spaces. For instance, a study published in Science Advances this year showed that fine-particle pollution—the most harmful form of air pollution—disproportionately affects the health of people of color in the US. First as an academic, and later as the cofounder of the environmental justice nonprofit the Center for Earth, Energy, and Democracy, Martinez has fought against industrial policies that are damaging to the most vulnerable among us. Now, as senior director for environmental justice at the White House Council on Environmental Quality, she is leading the charge in placing communities at the center of the government’s environmental policies—where they always should have been. It’s outrageous that the size of your wallet or the color of your skin determines whether your child grows up in a polluted environment. I admire Martinez’s tireless advocacy—from academia to the halls of power—and I especially hope that the concept of environmental justice is integrated into policy-making. It is, after all, a movement to ensure a basic fairness: a healthy world for all. By Helen Belmont
Senior Director, Communications, Private Sector Engagement By Helen Belmont
Senior Director, Communications, Private Sector Engagement i top Her leadership has informed my own way of approaching activism. Dolores Huerta witnessed the effects of dangerous chemicals that not only contaminated the earth and produce in US farm fields, but also poisoned the Mexican and Filipino men, women, and children laboring in those fields. These workers had little to no protection, which ignited Huerta’s lifelong fight for better labor conditions, increased wages, stricter environmental regulations, and landmark labor policies. In 1962, she and César Chávez founded the National Farm Workers Association, which later became the United Farm Workers of America. When Huerta received the Medal of Freedom from President Obama—whose presidential campaign had been invigorated by the rallying cry “¡Si se puede!” (“Yes we can!”) coined by Huerta in the early 1970s—she said, “The great social justice changes in our country have happened when people came together, organized, and took direct action.” When male farm workers and leaders dominated power structures, not only did Huerta make sure her own voice was heard, but she also empowered other Latina workers to make themselves heard. When mostly white faces led the feminist movement, Huerta worked with Gloria Steinem to champion justice for non-white women. When workers faced environmental hazards in the fields, she fought to regulate pesticides. Her leadership has informed my own way of approaching activism and connecting with people, and I continue to learn from her as I move through my career. By Grace Lee
Senior Specialist, Activism and Outreach By Grace Lee
Senior Specialist, Activism and Outreach i top She continues to be an inspiration to me in my career. As a young girl, I’d often sit cross-legged on the floor of my grandmother’s modest London home, readying myself for another tale of our matriarch’s childhood in India. She’d hold a cup of piping hot Darjeeling tea—her favored brew—and I’d nibble on a chocolate biscuit. The stories she enthralled me with were often about the adventures she and her sister, Anne, delighted in during their upbringing in central India. But sometimes she’d tell me more recent tales—about her niece Belinda Wright, Anne’s daughter. Before committing her life to conservation, Wright was a wildlife photographer and filmmaker who spent two years capturing the lives of wild tigers in the Kanha and Ranthambore tiger reserves in India. The 1984 National Geographic documentary Land of the Tiger, which resulted from this effort, won several international awards, including two Emmys. In 1994, Wright founded Wildlife Protection Society of India, an NGO focused on stopping poaching and illegal wildlife trade, especially in wild tigers. Later, working undercover in Tibet, she was part of a team that helped expose the enormity of tiger and leopard skin trade there. The findings helped lead to a denunciation by the Dalai Lama and spur a movement against the practice of wearing big cat skins in Tibet. Today, as I start my day’s work from the safety of my desk, I take a moment to thank her. She continues to be an inspiration to me in my career. I am in awe of her tireless devotion, her bravery, and the sacrifices she made to commit her life’s work to the incredible big cats. By Jennifer Roberts
Director of Development, WWF’s Global Tiger Program By Jennifer Roberts
Director of Development, WWF’s Global Tiger Program i top Ostrom’s legacy shapes how we work in conservation today. In 2009, Elinor “Lin” Ostrom was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in economics, but her legacy extends far beyond that singular honor. Ostrom countered the dominant narrative around “the tragedy of the commons,” an economic theory which argued that individuals pursue their own interests even when it goes against the collective good. (The theory was made famous by an ecologist who was a known racist and eugenicist.) Ostrom’s work challenging the theory proved that our planet could be protected through community, collaboration, and cooperation. One colleague who knew her said that she disliked the image of “helpless observers” being caught in a destructive pattern of resource depletion. So, through her cutting-edge and collaborative research, Ostrom showed that communities can and do self-organize to make decisions and create and enforce rules that lead to good outcomes. Ostrom pushed the boundaries of science and challenged the usual divisions between disciplines. Working in true partnership with others who thought differently than she did, she paved the way for a new research community and body of knowledge that embrace diversity and the intertwined nature of human and natural systems. Ostrom’s legacy shapes how we work in conservation today and continues to give me hope. Her principles on how to govern the commons from the bottom up guide our worldwide engagement to support and scale community-led institutions that protect the nature we all depend on. By Shauna Mahajan
Lead Senior Social Scientist By Shauna Mahajan
Lead Senior Social Scientist i top View all issues h