Around the world, WWF partners with producers, communities, and businesses working to develop new solutions to reduce their impact on nature. Meet a few of the farmers, ranchers, and fishers who are endeavoring to safeguard freshwater, cultivate healthy soils, minimize their carbon footprint, and produce food more sustainably. “Mostly, we prefer fish from the river, like carp, catfish, pangasius, and sheatfish. However, due to our growing population, food from nature will not be adequate to meet our needs.” In one of Tanzania’s main agricultural corridors, local people are creating more sustainable livelihoods by managing their natural resources to better support agriculture, maintain biodiversity, and secure river flows. Backed by a CARE-WWF Alliance project since 2016, communities here have identified and taken steps to conserve their water sources through a participatory land use planning process, planting water-friendly trees, and controlling access to their wetlands. “Having running water all year feels like a miracle,” says Lydia Adamu Kivinge of Utosi village, who monitors river levels so her community can make decisions based on sound data. At the same time, nature-based enterprises such as beekeeping have sprung up around wetland areas, creating more incentives to keep trees standing and water flowing. Access to water means farmers can now grow enough produce to sell, including introduced crops that are economically and environmentally viable. “I had no money to send my child to school, but now I am growing and selling beans and Irish potatoes,” says Kivinge, who is earning enough for her daughter’s tuition. Guided by the villagers’ vision for their future, ongoing efforts to strengthen governance practices and to address gender imbalances are also underway. Kivinge, who once would likely have been left out of critical decision-making about land and resources, today serves as general secretary of Utosi’s environmental committee. In addition, the project makes it easier for participants to save money, access credit, and make sustainable investments in nature-based enterprises and infrastructure to improve their livelihoods and the ecosystem services they depend on. “Sustainability is integrated into all our operations, so there is an obvious link between our production and financial results and our sustainability results, such as our impact on nature and fish welfare.” “We want to get the best grazing we can from an area .... We are going to do what is necessary to fatten our cattle, [while] conserving the forest that we have.” View all issues h