In Southern Africa's KAZA region, WWF, its partners, and local communities work together to reduce conflicts with wildlife Above photo: Community Guardians record details of conflict incidents, kraal construction, carnivore sightings, and more. As the apex species of their ecosystems, large carnivores—including lions, cheetahs, and leopards— require vast stretches of secure and connected habitat. Such landscapes allow them to hunt prey and establish their own territory apart from other, competing large carnivores. Increasingly, large carnivore habitats are under threat: As human populations grow, wildlife habitats become fragmented or destroyed. Carnivores may be forced to move through now human-dominated areas. When animals like large carnivores enter human-inhabited areas, they often prey on livestock, which has major economic value and cultural significance to many rural communities. People’s safety and livelihoods are in jeopardy and the carnivores face the threat of retaliatory killings after loss of livestock. Kraals are secured and fenced-in enclosures that protect cattle and goats from potential carnivore attacks. WWF’s partners, WildCRU and CLAWS in Botswana, Kwando Carnivore Trust in Namibia, and Wildlife Conservation Action in Zimbabwe, help build both permanent and mobile predator-proof kraals, as well as reinforce traditional kraals in conflict hotspots. Permanent kraals feature sturdy wooden poles along the perimeter, strong metal fencing, and a reinforced gate. Mobile kraals are made from canvas and allow communities to easily dismantle and relocate them. Mobile kraals also provide farmers with a fertile area for crops due to manure left behind by livestock. Both types of kraals have proved effective in keeping carnivores away from livestock with results ranging from 70-100% effective. WWF partners also use a lion alert system to help communities protect livestock. CLAWS and Kwando Carnivore Trust use satellite collar data to alert communities when a collared lion comes in proximity to villages. Through an SMS message or call to community members, farmers have a chance to gather their livestock into kraals or move away from the area when lions are approaching. Any long-term protection of large carnivore populations must include communities in decision-making and management. With support from WWF, WildCRU in Botswana and Wildlife Conservation Action in Zimbabwe train and employ local women and men as Community Guardians. The Guardians help reduce conflict in their communities by building and reinforcing kraals, monitoring wildlife movement, responding to incidents of human-wildlife conflict, and advising farmers on livestock management practices to prevent livestock predation. CLAWS also employs local community members to help their carnivore research and conflict management. In northwestern Botswana, the San Indigenous people monitor wildlife along and adjacent to the border with Namibia. For generations, the San have tracked wildlife and shared their knowledge with their descendants. In fact, San trackers are 98% accurate in identifying species and reconstructing complex wildlife behaviors. More recently, much of this traditional knowledge is being lost as community elders pass away. WWF supports Kalahari Wildlands Trust’s work with the San people to preserve their traditional knowledge and share it with younger generations through community-based, cross-generational wildlife monitoring teams. The data collected from the teams also helps identify important wildlife corridors, potential areas for wildlife recovery, and long-term management needs. WWF’s efforts to help people and large carnivores coexist in KAZA wouldn’t be possible without partnerships, local communities, and collaboration on all levels. Together, we work to better understand the abundance, distribution, and movements of large carnivores and other wildlife in our ongoing efforts to secure a better future for people and wildlife. Read more: Living with wild lions Read more: Living with wild lions