Late last year, I spent time with leaders and members of the Sicangu Lakota Oyate, also called the Rosebud Sioux Tribe. We celebrated the return of bison to their ancestral lands in what is today known as South Dakota. Together, we watched as five dozen bison were released onto the tribe’s Wolakota Buffalo Range—around 28,000 acres of native grassland that is home to North America’s largest herd owned and managed by Indigenous people. Over the past five years, WWF has invested around $3 million in restoring bison, or buffalo, to tribal lands here and throughout the Northern Great Plains to promote a healthier ecosystem and help restore the important ecological, economic, and cultural benefits that bison provide to Indigenous communities. Once numbering in the tens of millions, bison have long played a critical role in the lives of Indigenous peoples, who relied on these magnificent mammals for their meat, hide, and fur; many revered them as sacred. By the late 19th century, though, the species had been nearly eradicated by white settlers and hunters. The decimation of bison herds left Native American communities without their primary food source, negatively impacting their health and culture while degrading the ecosystem, which had evolved with the bison in a symbiotic relationship over thousands of years. Today, technological advances in agriculture and food production have enabled the feeding of billions of people, but this progress has not come without a cost. Mass production and the commodification of agriculture and food have not solved all the world’s food and nutrition security issues; in many respects, they have created new challenges. Agricultural production is currently responsible for 70% of biodiversity loss and represents 70% of global water use. And in a negative cycle, climate change, exacerbated in part by agriculture, is impacting our ability to produce food as it drives the loss of pollinators and wreaks havoc on freshwater supplies. The systems that should nourish and sustain us are moving us away from human and planetary health, spurred on by policies, lobbies, and entrenched interests that devalue our connection with the land and its importance in sustaining life in favor of profit. There are ways to produce food for a growing global population that don’t cost us the Earth. We need to collectively make food production smarter, use land and freshwater resources more efficiently, emit less carbon, drastically reduce waste throughout supply chains, and recognize small-scale food producers as guides and knowledge-holders—and as part of the solution. Indeed, they’re often nature’s guardians and conservation’s biggest allies. (See examples on the following pages.) View all issues h