HOPE GANGLOFF Julie Packard, 2018. Courtesy of Susan Inglett Gallery, NYC. On display at the National Portrait Gallery, Smithsonian Institution. CR The last time we were together in person was in DC, for the unveiling of your portrait at the Smithsonian’s National Portrait Gallery. I have to admit to being surprised when you told me about the portrait, since you don’t seek public attention as much as some others I know. So why did you agree to have a full-length portrait of yourself painted and hung in a Smithsonian museum? JP [Laughs] Well, you are so right, Carter. I am a total introvert, and that is not something that I would usually agree to. I said from the start, “I’ll do this, but the portrait is about the ocean, not me. I’ll be in the portrait, but the focus has to be the ocean and the aquarium.” We found this wonderful contemporary artist, Hope Gangloff, and it turned out to be one of the coolest experiences of my life. She just loved the aquarium, of course; she went wild painting in there. We hit it off and found out we have the same passion for the environment—we just work through different mediums. CR Well, the artist succeeded, since the portrait is indeed luminous in its depiction of a vast vertical kelp forest, and Julie Packard just happens to be there in the middle. [Laughter] I’d like to close with two of my favorite questions. First, what professional accomplishment are you most proud of? JP Leading the aquarium to be the force for nature that it is. It’s been a huge privilege. I was given this opportunity at a really young age, and I decided that the way to succeed would be to surround myself with people smarter than I am. I’ve met so many interesting people and learned so much and have grown to appreciate the power of institutions like ours. And I’m really proud of our team and all that they’ve accomplished. CR Last question: If you could be any animal on Earth, what animal would you be? JP I would be an ocean sunfish. The scientific name is Mola mola. We have them periodically in our open-sea exhibit at the aquarium. They’re the world’s largest bony fish. They’ve got a fin on the top and the bottom and sort of a lumpy, pseudo-tail on their behind. They’re just kind of a goofy-looking, endearing fish. I also like to point out that they eat jellyfish, and scientists say that in the future the ocean is going to be very favorable for jellyfish. And so if I am an ocean sunfish in the future, I will probably do fine in a global-warming world. CR I love that. Ocean sunfish. Definitely spectacular in their weirdness. Low-key and persistent in their own survival. Julie, thank you for all your work, and thank you for the role that the Packard Foundation has played in our work and the work of so many other institutions. And thanks for your time today. It’s been a real pleasure. JP Thank you, Carter, and good luck to you and the WWF team. You do fantastic work, and we’ll look forward to lots of great progress in the future. Want more of this conversation? Listen to Carter Robert's chat with Julie Packard on Panda Pod. Want more of this conversation? Listen to Carter Robert's chat with Julie Packard on Panda Pod. View all issues h