In Pakistan, there is both too much and too little water. Over the past few years, the country has experienced increasingly frequent and severe floods, with devastating impacts on public health, agriculture, homes, and infrastructure. Flooding has also contaminated local water supplies, straining already overstretched resources. Now, enhanced aquifer recharge* wells in the city of Lahore are helping to strike a balance by capturing, filtering, and redirecting rainwater. As pressure on water infrastructure intensifies from extreme weather events, enhanced aquifer recharge wells provide support by SLOWING runoff and mitigating flooding in communities and agricultural lands SLOWING DECREASING the risk of erosion and landslides DECREASING REPLENISHING groundwater levels and storing freshwater for future use, providing protection against droughts REPLENISHING IMPROVING the flow of rivers and springs during the dry season IMPROVING Percentage of Pakistan’s population with access to clean drinking water due to contamination from the improper disposal of toxic chemicals, untreated wastewater, salinity from excess irrigation, and agricultural runoff. Percentage of Pakistan’s population with access to clean drinking water due to contamination from the improper disposal of toxic chemicals, untreated wastewater, salinity from excess irrigation, and agricultural runoff. Groundwater supplies almost three-quarters of Pakistan’s domestic water and over half of its agricultural water. But with rapid population growth, urbanization, overextraction, and climate change, those critical resources are depleting rapidly: Per capita freshwater availability has dropped nearly 80% since the 1950s, while water demand rises about 10% every year, threatening the nation’s water security. almost three-quarters of Pakistan’s domestic water and over half of its agricultural water To address dwindling water availability, companies such as PepsiCo, Nike, and The Coca-Cola system and The Coca-Cola Foundation have partnered with WWF to support the construction of recharge wells in Lahore and beyond, helping to improve freshwater quality and accessibility for industry, communities, and wildlife. *RECHARGE occurs naturally when water from rain, rivers, irrigation, or other sources seeps into the earth and refills aquifers. It can also be achieved artificially by redirecting or injecting water into the ground. *RECHARGE View all issues h