By bringing bison back to Native lands and cultivating their own food, the Sicangu Lakota people are reclaiming not only their food sovereignty, but also their health, culture, and identity “Food security is about reconnecting with our traditional concept of food. It’s also about harvesting, preservation, and conserving foods for future generations.”

— Monica Rattling Hawk Around noon on a dazzling winter day, Rattling Hawk blazes along South Dakota Highway 27 in a Toyota RAV4. Sunlight illuminates the landscape as she heads south through the Pine Ridge Reservation—around 2 million acres of sprawling prairie grasslands, panoramic vistas, and rich cultural history just west of the Rosebud Reservation. In the distance, craggy buttes climb from the horizon alongside deep, windswept canyons. Rattling Hawk was born and raised on Pine Ridge, and her knowledge of the land, its people, and its fraught past is encyclopedic. “Up on that hill is Stronghold Table,” she says, indicating the formation that in 1890 hosted the last Ghost Dance—a ceremony the Lakota and other tribes performed to try to halt the annihilation of their people and way of life. “They thought the ritual would help bring their land back, and that the buffalo would come back too.” Before Euro-American settlers arrived, her Plains Tribes ancestors shadowed the buffalo as they migrated across the vast grasslands between the Mississippi River and the Rocky Mountains. “Buffalo were a huge part of our lifeways,” she says. Meat supplied food; hides were used for clothing, tents, and bedding; hair was braided into rope; bones were carved into tools and weapons. The hulking mammals, called pté, also figured centrally in oral histories and creation stories. Until the early 1800s, between 30 and 60 million buffalo populated the Great Plains, traversing the continent in massive herds said to sound like rolling thunder. Those herds were the beating heart of a richly biodiverse ecosystem: The buffalo’s grazing patterns fostered nesting habitat for birds, and their dung spread seeds and fertilized grasses. In winter, the herds cleared paths through the snow, enabling pronghorn and elk to forage in their wake. Their sharp hooves also left behind divots that aerated the soil and allowed water to soak into the ground, nourishing native plants and creating aquatic habitats for other wildlife. The sun hangs low in the sky by the time Rattling Hawk has made her way to the Wolakota Buffalo Range. Leaning against a metal fence, she looks on as TJ Heinert, the assistant range manager, maneuvers a tractor around an enclosed pasture and deftly unfurls a bale of hay—dinner for the 60 or so cows and calves corralled in a weathered barn next door. Heinert, wearing a Stetson and a silver-buckled belt, looks the consummate cowboy as he paces across the pasture and disappears briefly into the barn, his Australian cattle dog Bandita at his heels. He swings open an iron gate; suddenly, buffalo charge into the paddock in a flurry of dust and snorts. These animals, recently acquired from Cross Ranch Preserve in North Dakota, are in quarantine until they receive a clean bill of health, explains Heinert in a relaxed drawl. Afterward, they’ll be introduced to the range herd, which, thanks in part to his careful watch, now numbers close to 800. Spend one day on the Rosebud Reservation, home to 29,000 residents, and it becomes clear just how vital REDCO’s programs are. In the 20 communities that dot the reservation, about half of households live below the poverty line. Limited food access, economic depression, and poor health are intertwined, deeply entrenched issues—ones that Rattling Hawk views as the legacies of historical trauma and oppression. It’s a perspective she comes to through experience. As a child, Rattling Hawk endured periods of extreme poverty and food insecurity, especially after her family moved into government-owned housing when she was 12 years old. “There were times when all we had to eat was popcorn or USDA commodity foods. We got rations of flour, oatmeal, rice, and hot cereals, but our diet became very dependent on carbs and starchy foods,” she recalls. “We didn’t get much protein.” In Native American communities across the US, healthy, nourishing food is still difficult to come by, and grocery stores are few and far between. On Rosebud, some residents must drive two and a half hours to reach the nearest grocery store. In the supermarkets that do exist, they encounter row after row of processed and prepackaged foods—everything from sugary cereals to frozen pizzas. Fruits and vegetables, which have a short shelf life, are often low quality and sold at inflated prices. Last year, when an outpost of the Mexican fast-food joint Taco John’s opened on the reservation, it became faster and easier for some community members to buy a super-stuffed burrito or fried chicken taco than a locally grown squash or tomato. “Food sovereignty is a lifelong process. You can’t change it in a day.” 

— Foster Cournoyer-Hogan On a bright, brisk morning, dew clings to Rosebud’s fields as Michelle Haukaas, a willowy figure sporting a black beanie, strides into a geodesic-domed greenhouse. Upon entering, she points to the main attraction: a towering banana tree, its leaves fanned out toward the sunlight. “This is probably the most surprising thing we’ve grown. It was only supposed to be 20 feet tall, but after just six months it’s already touching the roof,” she laughs. Closer to the ground, a chaotic jumble of plants grows in raised beds. Walking around the perimeter, Haukaas lists some of the bounty she oversees: sprays of lettuces, leggy stalks of rhubarb, bright green peppers, kale, cabbage, and tomatoes. Nearby, a pop of color peeks out from behind some leaves: a lemon that’s just begun to turn yellow. Perched on Rosebud’s highest hill, the greenhouse is part of the Keya Wakpala Community Garden, a one-acre teaching and production plot and SFSI’s flagship project. As garden manager, Haukaas supervises a large team of volunteers and interns who keep it running—watering and monitoring the plants and soil, hoeing, weeding, adding compost to crop beds, preparing seedling trays, and tending the birds in the coop next door, where a vocal rooster struts alongside a throng of snow-white ducks. Their labor is testament to the project’s success. In its first season in 2014, the garden was little more than an empty wheat field and a vision, says Haukaas. Volunteers had to attach a garden hose to a fire hydrant and run it 800 feet to water beets and a few other seedlings. Fast-forward eight years, and the garden has become a thriving enterprise that supplies fruits and vegetables to SFSI’s seasonal farmers market, donates to the immersion school, and delivers fresh produce to 16 Rosebud communities. Bolstered by a Food System Vision Prize from The Rockefeller Foundation, SFSI’s work has also recently expanded to include a seed bank and cooking and nutrition classes for adults and children. Another program teaches participants to grow their own gardens and to develop agricultural business plans—and provides opportunities for start-up funding. “Rosebud has around 1 million acres, so we’re trying to get people to learn how to work and grow off the land,” Haukaas explains. Ultimately, the goal is to empower them to contribute to local grocery stores and restaurants and support a food system that’s self-sustaining. Building interest is a slow process, Haukaas and Wilson admit, but as these projects continue to meet people’s acute needs, community awareness and excitement are increasing. The farmers market alone is proof: when open, it receives around 200 visitors each weekend. For his part, Wilson is looking to the future. He envisions more locals starting their own gardens, learning to forage, and opening catering businesses, restaurants, and cafes. “And I would love for buffalo to become a much bigger part of people’s diets,” he says. Wilson himself, a fan of cooking and putting an Indigenous spin on his favorite recipes, dreams of one day opening his own food truck. “I’m hoping that I can work myself out of a job and that, eventually, food sovereignty is a reality.” That reality seems within reach as Cournoyer-Hogan prepares lunch for the kindergarten and first grade students at the immersion school. Just outside the kitchen where he’s busy chopping vegetables, a kid-sized sandwich board announces the menu: khukhúše-tȟaló (pork), psíŋ (wild rice), watȟotȟo (vegetables), and tȟaspáŋ (apples). “I try to make home-cooked meals every day. I don’t used processed or canned foods,” he says. “Instead, I use fresh produce that’s in season.” Launched through the Sicangu CDC in 2020, the school aspires to create a new generation of fluent Lakota speakers who are also well versed in Lakota traditions, heritage, and culture. As part of that education, in September 2021 the school’s staff, students, and their families took part in one of the first buffalo harvests on the Wolakota Buffalo Range. “Many of the attendees had knowledge about how to harvest the bison and use the different parts,” Cournoyer-Hogan says. “How cool is that?” Since then, he’s been incorporating bison meat into the students’ meals, using it in soups, roasts, and more. Through food, he says, he’s hoping to teach the children about healthy eating habits and Native diets, as well as the challenges their community faces: “You’re teaching life skills, but also critical thinking,” he says. He believes that if students and others on the reservation can begin to make connections—between what they eat and how and where it’s produced, for instance—they too can become drivers of change. Cournoyer-Hogan, like Rattling Hawk, Wilson, and Haukaas, recognizes that there’s still a long way to go before the Sicangu Lakota achieve true food sovereignty. But, he says, the buffalo range, garden, farmers market, and school represent substantial steps forward—and for him, they are indicative of larger efforts by Native nations across the country to realize their economic, spiritual, and political power. As the morning’s lessons wrap up, children trickle into the large main room where they eat lunch. One boy with a long braid makes a beeline for the kitchen and shouts his request: “Foster, don’t forget about my celery and my carrots!” Cournoyer-Hogan chuckles. “Some students like their vegetables raw,” he shrugs. The moment could be easily overlooked, but it speaks to the evolving attitudes toward fresh food and its availability on the reservation. Long-held stances—and perhaps even taste buds—are shifting. And like a sprouting seed, change is growing from the ground up. View all issues h