This interview has been edited for length and clarity. CARTER ROBERTS Good morning. What a pleasure to see you again. The Smithsonian is such a central part of the American record and the American experience. What is the Smithsonian’s role today, more than 170 years after its founding? LONNIE BUNCH The Smithsonian is a place of science and history and art, but more importantly, it’s the glue that holds the country together. It’s also a place where people will find opportunities for learning and discussion. At a time when people are getting information that’s not always the best, and at a time when people are so polarized, there are only a few places where people come together. The Smithsonian is one of them. CR A lot of the Smithsonian’s many resources have to do with nature. You’ve got the Museum of Natural History. You’ve got the National Zoo in Washington, DC, and the Conservation Biology Institute in Front Royal, Virginia, which work together to save wildlife species from extinction. You’ve got the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute in Panama, devoted to studying tropical ecosystems. And you’ve got the Smithsonian Environmental Research Center in the Chesapeake Bay. How do you convey the importance of nature for people through those assets? LB I think the challenge is to take what we do and then tell those stories through the lens of humanity. For example, I’d love to see us do a major interdisciplinary exhibition on nature that would help people understand how climate change has shaped development over time. CR I’d love to help you with that. Making the connection between nature and people, and their well-being, and their culture, and their lives, is the fundamental narrative that we have to tell better. If you think back to your childhood, what was your first experience with nature? LB I lived in Belleville, in New Jersey. There were these high-tension power lines that ran through the town, and areas around them were left undisturbed, so nature took over. As kids, we would explore these areas and look for snakes and raccoons. Most people were scared of what was there. I was fascinated. I used to get in trouble for bringing home everything I found. My dad was a scientist, so he encouraged me. But I still remember the day I brought some snakes home and put them in my closet. After a while I heard my mother scream, and let’s just say that was the last time I brought anything home from my outside adventures. CR So you were a collector from an early age. LB Absolutely. View all issues h