World Wildlife Fund (WWF) is proud to highlight the recipients of the 2023 WWF Russell E. Train Education for Nature (EFN) fellowships and grants. This year’s recipients include 62 individuals and organizations from 26 countries across the globe who are furthering the cause of conservation through academic research and leadership efforts to create lasting solutions that pave the way for a sustainable future. WWF Russell E. Train Education for Nature (EFN) Now in its 29th year, EFN has continued its legacy of providing financial support for the education, scientific research, and training of local leaders and institutions to steward their own natural resources. This year's cohort, selected through an annual multi-step rigorous assessment, will receive support through fellowships and grants totalling $1,197,365 for one to three years. These individuals and institutions will focus on a broad range of topics, from understanding fisheries and indigenous food systems in Bolivia, Myanmar, and Mozambique to community-based forest restoration in Nepal, Tanzania, and Paraguay. The 2023 fellowships and grant recipients join EFN’s global community of over 3,000 individuals and 600 institutions across 60 countries who are working to advance conservation, at every level, from research and fieldwork to executive and policy work. EFN invests in the power of local leaders and communities to identify and steward solutions to biodiversity challenges at local, national, and regional scales. A summary of this year’s award winners include: The following are fellowship and grant recipients listed by their focus areas: Click on the images to learn more about each recipient. × × Liliana Sierra Castillo’s research aims to identify social factors (e.g.,
institutions, property rights, culture, traditions) influencing these
transformations. Her work will determine suitable frameworks for food system
transformation, enabling stakeholders to implement them effectively. By prioritizing
community-centered and comprehensive approaches, this research strives to enhance
food security for vulnerable communities in Honduras while safeguarding their
reliance on fishery resources. × × Ultra-processed foods (UPFs) are industrial formulations that negatively affect
individuals and planetary health. In addition to marketing campaigns, UPFs are
designed to be hyperpalatable, which enhances their hedonic value and the pleasure associated with consumption. Thayane Castro Carvalho Lemos will investigate whether UPFs activate high emotional responses that may drive consumers to choose UPFs over unprocessed or minimally processed foods. Thayane’s findings on understanding the association between emotional responses to UPFs and the development of food addiction symptoms can support policies in Brazil aimed at promoting healthy and sustainable food systems by reducing UPFs consumption. × × Addressing the socio-ecological crisis posed by the degradation and loss of tropical forests in Guatemala requires integration of local Traditional Ecological Knowledge on restoration, conservation, and rural development strategies. Boris Llamas Menchú will investigate how the Maya Q'eqchi' Traditional Ecological Knowledge can be implemented in agroforestry systems for the restoration of tropical forests and sustainable rural development in the Maya Q'eqchi' communities of Alta Verapaz, Petén, and Izabal in Guatemala. Using interdisciplinary approaches, Boris will document the Maya Q'eqchi Traditional Ecological Knowledge on timber and non-timber species in the tropical forests of Petén, Alta Verapaz, and Izabal. Boris’s work will provide relevant forest species for tropical forest restoration based on cultural and ecological importance which will support the design of agroforestry systems that incorporate the Maya Q'eqchi' Traditional Ecological Knowledge for community use. × × Food waste accumulation, vulnerable food systems, and food insecurity are the major causes of environmental degradation and poor human health. Zhi Ling Chew’s research aims to convert durian seed and food wastes using BSFL into a high-value and healthier cocoa butter alternative in chocolate. The cocoa butter alternative derived from renewable durian seed and BSFL is expected to produce cheaper, sustainable, low saturated fat, cadmium free, and trans-fat free chocolates. Zhi Ling’s findings will contribute to maximum utilization of food wastes which will help to improve environmental sustainability, waste management, food security, conservation, and nutrition. × × Sharks and rays are endangered due to hunting for their fins and meat. Irianies Cahya Gozali’s proposed work aims to understand the intersection of shark conservation and traditional food systems in Indonesia. Using a multidisciplinary approach, Irianies will collect data on the production and distribution of shark and ray meat, evaluate local perceptions and cultural practices, and develop material flow analysis that will track flow of materials through the fisheries system.
Findings will classify species based on their sustainability and health impacts, providing alternatives to shark and ray meat. Irianies’ findings will also improve elasmobranch conservation and promote long-term food security in local communities. × × Resource-user conflicts in fisheries are an impediment to addressing food insecurity at local and national levels. Few studies have focused on evaluating the implications of conflicts between sport and recreational fisheries on food and nutrition security in the Western Indian Ocean. Sarah Ater’s research will highlight the contribution of marine sport and recreational fisheries in the food systems dialogue. Using a case study approach, Sarah’s work will assess conflicts and the consequences of overlooking these fisheries and document the role of sports and recreational fisheries to food systems in Kenya. Findings will be useful in the process of enhancing contributions of fisheries in the blue economy and sustainable blue foods and therefore, transforming food systems at community and national levels. × × People have continuously evolved their livelihoods by diversifying their interactions with biodiversity, thereby accumulating a collective knowledge referred to as biocultural memory. Both ecosystem degradation and habitat loss by local people simultaneously threaten biodiversity, food sovereignty, and biocultural memory itself.
Maraísa Resende Braga’s research intends to understand how biocultural memory underpins the food sovereignty of traditional farming communities across contrasting biomes in Brazil. Maraísa's work will demonstrate the potential synergies between agrobiodiversity, the livelihoods of local people, and the knowledge that sustains both. Information about food sovereignty of traditional farming communities will be an opportunity to harmonize biodiversity and human survival. × × Rice is the staple crop that is economically important in Myanmar. Economic upheaval brought about by the climate, pandemic, and civil unrest has been disrupting rice production, on-farm management practices, and the livelihoods of rural farming households. Further disruptions can threaten regional food security and stability and undermine conservation efforts in rural communities.
Phoo Pye Zone will identify the factors constraining rice yields both prior to and amid these crises, with the aim of developing adaptive strategies for enhanced productivity and ecosystem services. Phoo’s work will inform policy and propose sustainable practices, supporting increased rice production, biodiversity, and rural development. × × The changing climate has significantly caused a reduction in the amount of rainfall, resulting in drought and deterioration of grazing conditions in Namibia. Indigenous facultative Crassulacean Acid Metabolism plants can provide emergency fodder in times of crisis due to their drought-adaptive mechanisms.
Aune Tuyoleni Angobe will assess the facultative Crassulacean Acid Metabolism photosynthesis of indigenous plants in Southern Africa and their biomass production potential. By identifying drought-resistant plants as fodder alternatives, Aune’s work will contribute to relieving ecosystem pressure, preserving biodiversity, and promoting native species. The findings will also highlight underutilized plants with valuable fodder, aligning with conservation goals for long-term resilience and food security. × × The native food systems of the Suku Anak Dalam (SAD), a forest nomad indigenous community living in Jambi Province has rapidly changed. This is due to massive deforestation that turned the forest into palm and rubber tree plantations resulting in declining food sources and access to market food sources.
Sadar Ginting’s research aims to empower indigenous SAD communities in order to strengthen local food security, combat deforestation, and promote environmental sustainability. By combining indigenous and interdisciplinary perspectives, Sadar’s findings will provide support to indigenous SAD by introducing alternative food sources that align with their cultural values. In the long term, Sadar hopes that this work will amplify indigenous SAD’s knowledge to sustain their eco-friendly food production and actively participate in reforestation and wildlife restoration. × × Food security and natural resource conservation are critical for long-term livelihoods and poverty reduction in the rangelands' fragile drylands.
Silas Osinde’s research aims to raise local and community awareness and preparedness for low carbon food production systems and effects of climate change and variability on the food production system, natural resources, and ecosystem integrity.
Using multiple data sets and geospatial tools, Osinde will establish baseline information at all agroecological levels to support the management of rangelands for ecosystem resilience and safeguard local communities and wildlife. × × Irene Mamani Velazco will identify and analyze agri-food systems of the recently created local communities in Chiquitanía, an area of expansion of the agricultural frontier of Santa Cruz in Bolivia. Using a combination of methods, Irene will define case-studies of food systems which will be important in understanding sustainability practices in the production and provision of agroforestry-based food.
Findings will provide recommendations for modifications to the land distribution policy and procedural changes to promote human settlements with a focus on sustainable agri-food systems. × × Agricultural land will need to serve the growing purposes such as carbon and nitrogen storage, in addition to the production of adequate food. However, much of the land has been degraded due to deforestation and uncontrolled fires, therefore, requiring multifaceted global strategies that account for sustainable land uses and equitable food security.
Cremildo Francisco’s research will examine the use of biochar, a product resulting from the decomposition of organic matter, in the improvement of soil quality in agricultural production areas. Using maize cultivation as a case study, Cremildo's work will assess the role of biochar in improving the physical, chemical, and biological quality of the soil in the buffer zone of the Chimanimani National Park, Mozambique. Successful use of biochar to improve the soil quality has the potential to favor the production of maize, as a source of food security for families. × × Agostinho Júnior Mahanjane will investigate a fish diet with high inclusion of plant protein by determining the palatability, acceptability, and digestibility through supplementing it with essential amino acids (arginine). The development of an alternative plant-based fish diet with less pollution impacts on the surrounding environment will contribute to increased economic benefit to local farmers and environmental sustainability. × × Advancing the transition of food systems towards regenerative models is indispensable in order to conserve, as well as to repair and enhance local ecosystems and global biomes. Noa Cykman’s research focuses on Terra Vista, a Brazilian community settled by the MST that cultivates cacao and other food crops through agroforestry. Traditional in southern Bahia, the cabruca cacao system can integrate more than 250 native species, being vital for the conservation of the region's Atlantic Forest. Noa aims to understand how this settlement integrates ecosystem restoration, human liberation, and communal sovereignty. Noa’s findings will contribute to designing appropriate public policies for agroecology, agrarian reform, and regenerative food systems, attuned to the interconnected social and ecological dimensions of agroecological practice. Click on the images to learn more about each recipient. × × Wild edible mushrooms (WEM) are a source of food and income for local African people. They are much appreciated in local and urban areas but appear seasonally in the harvesting zones. Unfortunately, there is limited scientific information on how climate can affect the quantity and period of availability of WEM and how the interaction climate-productivity can affect the well-being of actors involved in mushroom harvesting and selling.
Juvey Mavéric WAWA will examine the impact of the fluctuation of harvested mushrooms on the incomes of the various actors by documenting the associated microclimates and quantity of harvested mushrooms. Juvey’s work will enable diverse stakeholders to understand the correlation between microclimate of the area and the productivity of fungi. This information will support the conservation of wild mushrooms in the Republic of Congo. × × In Cameroon, hornbills disseminate large proportions of fruit trees that comprise 22% of our forests. However, the populations of yellow-casqued hornbills in Ebo-Forest are declining due to poaching, habitat loss, and fragmentation.
Mundi Nnandi Noukou Onella will work with communities to effectively stop the population decline of hornbills. She will undertake research to determine relative abundance, document local knowledge, and determine hornbill responses to habitat disturbances and anthropogenic activities. By understanding how locals perceive hornbills through myths associated with their protection and trade, Mundi will leverage the support from local communities and authorities to develop synergies for better conservation of hornbills. × × The increasing numbers of hunters and improvement of hunting techniques is exacerbating direct pressure on wildlife.
Jonas Kambale Nyumu will use cutting-edge simulation with several scenarios of wildlife for a sustainable management of bushmeat in the Yangambi landscape. His research will develop interactive scenarios of simulation and modeling that highlight the current status of wildlife in the area which will then be compared to different scenarios that show the trends of wildlife based on factors such as number of hunters and traps, days allocating to hunting and wildlife law enforcement, alternative protein to bushmeat, alternative activities to hunting, and wildlife management agreement. Jonas work will enable better predictions of hunting pressure and provide an evidence base in reduction of hunting pressure on wildlife. × × Other effective area-based conservation measures (OECMs) have been promoted globally as a new conservation tool. Having rich cultural diversity, Indonesia has huge potential to support OECMs to complement marine protected areas.
Estradivari will examine how OECMs can be implemented in various marine contexts in Indonesia, especially in modern turbid reefs, and synthesize the perspectives of policymakers and stakeholders on the criteria and practical guidance of OECM implementation for marine conservation. × × Persistent droughts are increasingly affecting drylands in Kenya resulting in rapid vegetation degradation coupled with limited conservation efforts. Addressing these challenges requires balancing biodiversity conservation with community livelihoods.
Peter Erot Lokitela will investigate community livelihood options and associated impacts on biodiversity conservation in the Greater Turkana South Sub-County, Kenya. Using a combination of methods, Peter will gather data on biodiversity management practices, livelihood options, threats to biodiversity, and perspectives of local communities about the benefits and burdens of conservation efforts and land use changes. The findings will provide a baseline for developing strategic tools for better spatial and temporal land-use planning and management for improved outcomes for biodiversity conservation and local community livelihood diversification especially for women and youth in Turkana County. × × High Andean forests provide multiple ecosystem services, but are one of the most threatened habitats in the tropical Andes.
Harold Rusbelth Quispe-Melgar will generate information on the physical, physiological, and ecological aspects of the seeds of the high Andean tree Polylepis incana (queñoa). Harold’s work seeks to answer one of the most basic questions about the trees of this genus, “why do the seeds have low germination rates?” Harold’s findings will generate useful information to facilitate and promote the use of seeds in reforestation and restoration projects in the central Andes, thus contributing to the conservation of these forests and the unique biodiversity they harbor. × × Juma Joseph Kegamba will investigate how wildlife conservation institutional frameworks affect the practices and distribution of conservation benefits to local people in the GSE in Tanzania. Benefit-sharing has been instrumental in empowering local communities living on the edge of protected areas to engage in natural resource management and enhance biodiversity conservation outcomes.
Juma will apply mixed methods to understand benefit-sharing mechanisms and their effectiveness to conservation and the cost of conservation for the local communities living around protected areas forming the GSE. Juma’s work will develop conservation benefit-sharing models which will adequately inform the development of better benefit-sharing approaches to improve community livelihoods and conservation efforts. × × Since the 1970s, Nepal’s degraded forests were handed over to the community, in an effort to restore and improve the livelihood of community members. However, the communities have had to bear the burden of opportunity costs, such as stopping the collection of fuel wood and controlling grazing.
Mahendra Singh Thapa will examine the local and national definition of community-based forest restoration and associated costs and benefits of forest restoration. Using a case study approach, Mahendra will document ecosystem services and associated factors, and determine the extent to which forest restoration has changed in the last decade. The outcomes will inform researchers, policy makers, and forest managers to support community-based forest restoration for improving livelihood of rural people and biodiversity conservation. × × Did you know that animal carcasses play an important role in providing nutrients for plants and animals?
Sui Peng Heon will investigate the little-known world of carrion decomposition and the scavengers in tropical forests. These biodiversity hotspots are critical for maintaining many global ecological processes. By investigating the decomposition process and scavenger activity in tropical forests and comparing the outcomes to an oil palm plantation, Sui will provide a better understanding of the role of biodiversity in maintaining this ecosystem process.
The findings will provide valuable insights to inform decision makers to improve conservation measures in support of the conservation of tropical forests. × × Handing over the forest to users has become successful in terms of slowing down the pace of forest degradation, restoring the degraded areas, and improving wildlife populations. However, lack of consideration for the interrelationship between the surrounding local communities and forest resources may undermine the positive outcomes.
Keshav Raj Acharya will evaluate the role played by buffer zone community forests (BZCF) in the supply of forest products and biodiversity conservation in the buffer zone of Bardia National Park, Nepal. Specifically, Keshav will focus on assessing the forest cover and quality change, contribution of BZCF in meeting the needs of the local community, and habitat suitability for wildlife occupancy between BZCF and the adjoining national park. Outcomes from Keshav’s work will enable better development of policies to improve human-tiger co-existence. × × The highly biodiverse Albertine landscape of Murchison Falls National Park and Budongo Central Forest Reserve in Uganda, currently faces a wide range of threats emanating from several human activities such as road infrastructure development, oil and gas development activities, and several resource use and extraction activities.
Benard Matovu seeks to assess the combined and cumulative effects of these activities on the ranging and community ecology of selected functional groups of mammals in the landscape. The findings of this study will be crucial in guiding conservation action planning for mammals amidst exacerbating human activities in the landscape. × × Turneffe Atoll Marine Reserve provides a unique system with minimal development and expansive mangrove and coral reef habitats. Coral communities have been documented living on or near mangroves in Turneffe where conditions such as water chemistry, temperature, and light availability are incredibly variable from reefs. However, there is a gap in understanding the population structures of coral communities within the Turneffe Atoll.
Ninon Martinez will investigate the possible connectivity among areas of the atoll and will transplant corals between both mangrove and coral habitats to determine adaptability of the corals to their new conditions. Ninon's work to understand whether these populations are locally adapted or genetically distinct from those on the reef can aid in forecasting shifting coral assemblages and explore coral species abilities to exploit alternative habitats. × × Mushrooms play an important role in Namibian livelihoods, contributing as food, medicine, and household income. The loss of habitat due to deforestation, as well as the increasing demand for mushrooms are likely to present a threat to mushroom biodiversity in Namibia. The described indigenous mushrooms are a small number of the total mushroom diversity that is expected, and the described species are not preserved in a herbarium.
Isabella Ueitele will use a combination of morphologic, genetic, and metabolomics analyses to describe Namibian polypore mushrooms. Isabella will work with community stakeholders and students in mushroom sample collections and interviews for indigenous knowledge. The data generated will contribute towards setting up a Mycology herbarium. × × Javier Oña will undertake applied research with the aim to evaluate the effects of marine debris and toxic plastic-derived chemicals on the health status of humpback whales in their breeding grounds in Ecuador. Direct impacts as scars by entanglements, or indirect impacts associated such as skin disease and bioaccumulation of toxic plastic-derived chemicals in skin of whales will allow to understand the toxicity risk in the health status of the humpback whale population of the Southeast Pacific stock.
Javier’s findings will support the design of effective conservation strategies, such as reducing single-use plastics including advising policymakers to improve national mitigation actions in coastal marine areas. × × Barbara Isabela Escobar Anleu's research focuses on mammals, with an emphasis on wild cats.
Barbara’s work will evaluate the effectiveness of passive acoustic monitoring and SMART patrols in reducing poaching activity in Izabal, a department of Guatemala, that is a critical area for the connectivity of the five wild cat species present in the country: Jaguar (Panthera onca), Puma (Puma concolor), Ocelot (Leopardus pardalis), Jaguarundi (Herpailurus yagouaroundi), and Margay (Leopardus wiedii).
Using multiple datasets, Barbara will determine the main drivers of occurrence of mammals in the protected areas of Izabal and evaluate the genetic connectivity of pumas in three Central American countries. Findings will contribute to evaluating effectiveness of conservation actions as well as better planning of management and conservation actions for mammals in
a biological corridor of the region. × × Singye Wangmo has always been keen on learning and developing her skills in wildlife conservation science. Pursuing a Ph.D. at Oxford University will be an important platform in stepping up her career as a wildlife conservation researcher.
Singye will investigate the spatial and ecological requirements for conserving large carnivores at vast spatial scales, and the human dimensions of relationships to large carnivores, specifically the social carrying capacity of large carnivores in Bhutan. Singye is committed to continuing working at the interface between science and conservation management to ensure that policymakers and conservationists are afforded the best available scientific information to effectively manage and safeguard large carnivore populations and enable communities to better coexist with them. × × The implications of climate change are affecting the habitats of many river species. Magaly Cusipuma Ayuque believes that it is important to analyze and quantify the amount of sediment that is deposited or eroded in times of flooding to guarantee that the habitat of some species will not be affected.
Magaly’s research will examine sediment transportation to analyze the flushing processes in hydropower reservoirs in the Amazon rivers in Peru. Specifically, this fellowship will allow Magaly to establish a theoretical framework to study the flushing process for large hydroelectric dams, including analytical methods and physical approaches and define sediment transport parameters and possibilities for calibration and validation of the flushing processes. Magaly’s research contributions will be important in optimizing future flushing operations to manage the sedimentation process in the reservoirs so that we can ensure the sustainable use and water conservation in the Amazon rivers. Click on the images to learn more about each recipient. × × There is increasing recognition in valuing of Non-Timber Forest Products (NTFPs) as an instrument for Sustainable Development Goals and biodiversity conservation around protected areas in Africa. ABOYERD will work with the indigenous forest users and youths to safeguard forest regeneration and initiate a transition into modern agroecology through the development of pro-biodiversity green value chains for NTFPs in the Campo Ma’an’s park, known for iconic biodiversity in Cameroon. The project aims to establish a balance where the interests of both people and the environment are satisfied, balancing social desires and ecological needs. × × The project will restore degraded landscapes and strengthen the habitability conditions of existing biodiversity in the districts of Edelira and Itapúa Poty in the Department of Itapúa. By working with the Oñoirû beneficiaries, Asociación Oñoiru will strengthen the capacities in forest management with a gender approach and contribute to restoring forest ecosystems by planting yerba mate-growing native fruit trees, timber, and living fence trees. × × A Rocha Kenya will engage local communities to restore degraded forest areas in the Dakatcha woodland by replanting indigenous trees and managing natural tree regeneration. The proposed work also complements previous efforts by connecting conservation action with direct forest benefits such as high-volume honey production, regenerative agriculture, and holistic management. These efforts will build the capacity of young Kenyans and the wider community and promote food security by supporting local farmers to adopt kitchen gardening as a simple sustainable alternative to increase food security. × × The project will use assisted natural regeneration in recovering areas in the High Andes of northwestern Pichincha, Ecuador. Working with the Alambi community, the project will propagate and plant species of native forest, herbaceous, and shrubby plants, which are important for the local birdlife. In addition, the project will conduct workshops to continue strengthening local capacities to enhance alternative livelihoods such as nature tourism and the commercialization of native plants, such as for hummingbird gardens. × × Black Jaguar Foundation’s community mobilization project aims to expand the activities of Araguaia seeds network. The project includes training more than 300 people from communities in rural settlements and vulnerable areas in southern Pará and western Tocantins. These activities will focus on promoting local commitment in favor of the preservation of the Amazon Forest. At the same time, Black Jaguar Foundation’s nursery will produce 500,000 seedlings of native species. This local seed source will contribute to the ecological restoration of degraded areas that require permanent preservation. × × Our goal is to contribute to the improvement of the environmental and social conditions of the Farallones de Cali area. We will work with the local community to restore the medium-high basin of the Cali River by planting 10,000 trees in properties with potential for agroforestry and ecotourism. We will also implement education-research-action activities with the local schools and communities about restoration and threatened species. × × Cerrado de Pé aims to restore four hectares of forest that border an important spring that has been impacted by recurrent fires within the Chapada dos Veadeiros National Park. The project includes the promotion and participation of different stakeholders by structuring a volunteer and training program that focuses on understanding the Cerrado landscapes and their challenges. The efforts will also promote the production chain of native seeds with the demand for restoration planting, generating income for seed collectors. × × The Communal Forest of the 48 Cantones in Totonicapán is one of the most emblematic life zones of Guatemala, due to its Indigenous governance model based on principles of worldview, equity, inclusion, and sustainability of the Maya K’iche’ people of Totonicapán. EcoLogic Development Fund seeks to work with the Maya K’iche’ people to restore and conserve the biodiversity and forest cover of 11,200 hectares of communal forest in the 48 Cantones and strengthen the governance of community organizations, through ancestral practices and entrepreneurship initiatives, to reduce pressure on the forest. × × Guyra Paraguay will promote local knowledge in forest management by establishing a pilot training site for rural youth and Mbya Guaraní youth on sustainable agroforestry models and restoration of natural resources already implemented by local communities in San Rafael, which contribute to sustainable livelihoods and reduce pressures on the Atlantic Forest. This goal will be achieved through 1) Planning and design of the Kaaguy Pora Agro-ecological Experimental Center from the participation of farmers and indigenous leaders who innovate by combining traditional, ancestral, and modern techniques of regenerative agroforestry production and with the declaration of interest of relevant public institutions and 2) Pilot implementation of the regenerative agroforestry program at the “Kaaguy pore” Agro-ecological Experimental Center-CEA, with basic conditions in situ ready for its establishment. × × The participatory reforestation and training project aims to help and train indigenous people of the Napo Province to reforest their privately owned land with agroforestry systems combining lumber species, fruit species, medicinal species, and other short-term crops. A nursery is built with each group and beneficiaries are involved at each step of the tree production process through collective work sessions, to be able to replicate these techniques and continue independently with their reforestation plan after the end of the project. We then bring personal support to each beneficiary for their trees’ plantation and maintenance. × × The project will be conducted in the western sector of the Actun Kan park to restore the buffer zone, a water recharge area and refuge for multiple species. ProPeten will carry out environmental education with youths in schools located aroun