Somewhere in the Gulf of Aden, a young Somali pirate stands at the bow of a skiff doing 23 knots, an AK-47 cradled in his arms, the spray of briny ocean water on his face. He and his compatriots are closing in fast on their catch of the day: a Japanese cargo ship whose crew scrambles to repel the attackers with high-powered water cannons and sonic weapons. More than 2,000 miles away, an 8-year-old Nigerian girl forages for firewood near Lake Chad. A glint of metal catches her eye and she bends down to pick up what looks like a piece of jewelry. The landmine—left there by the terrorist organization Boko Haram—kills her instantly. And across the globe, a coyote smuggles a Guatemalan farmer, his family, and several other desperate Central American migrants into the United States. Halfway across the unforgiving Arizona desert, one of the group’s members succumbs to exhaustion and dehydration. At first glance, these three tragedies appear completely unrelated. But look closer. In Somalia, many modern-day pirates started off as fishers, but decades of overfishing have depleted key marine populations, driving them to take up arms on the high seas. Likewise, in Nigeria a growing population and the dramatic drying up of Lake Chad have driven worsening poverty for many locals—a crisis Boko Haram has exploited to boost recruitment. Meanwhile, the illegal ivory trade fuels violent militant groups—some with ties to Boko Haram, the Lord’s Resistance Army, and other terrorist organizations. And finally, in Guatemala, rising temperatures, changing rainfall, and poor agricultural practices have contributed to the steady decline of coffee plantations and subsistence crops. Add that to an already combustible mix of high unemployment, food insecurity, and rising violence, and it’s no wonder a growing number of Guatemalans are risking everything for the chance at a better life in the US. All three scenarios illustrate how environmental factors can be the catalyst for instability, as a combination of climate change
and our overexploitation of natural resources steers many parts of the world toward conflict, extremism, and mass human migrations. The evidence is everywhere. Unsustainable fishing has exhausted wild populations in important coastal regions. The conversion of land for agriculture drives rampant deforestation. Depleted water resources undermine food production and deepen political and ethnic fault lines. The American Association for the Advancement of Science estimates that by 2020 our deteriorating environment will force 50 million people around the world to leave their homes. View all issues h