From detecting deforestation with remote sensors in Brazil to preventing sea turtle bycatch with LED lights on fishing nets in Indonesia, scientists around the world are harnessing the power of technology to address conservation challenges. WWF is at the forefront of that work, using new tools to monitor species and supply chains, survey and protect habitats, and curb threats to wildlife and people. Finding solutions to environmental challenges doesn’t always require reinventing the wheel, though. In 2014, WWF launched the Wildlife Crime Technology Project, an initiative designed to prevent the poaching of elephants and black rhinos in Kenya’s Maasai Mara National Reserve. Leaning into his electrical engineering background, WWF conservation engineer Eric Becker helped configure FLIR (forward-looking infrared) thermal cameras to use artificial intelligence to identify people, enabling rangers to spot would-be poachers at night. So far, the cameras have assisted in catching more than 280 poachers, and WWF and FLIR are now expanding the use of thermal technology into 11 Kenyan rhino conservation areas. But because conservation work often occurs in remote regions, implementing technology on the ground isn’t always easy. “Much of the world is wired, but the field is not,” says Becker. “Vast protected areas have no power and no cell phone coverage.” Creating infrastructure to build secure private networks that can store and process data is often the first step. Once landscapes are outfitted with wireless reception, the real creativity can begin—whether that means identifying innovative, off-the-shelf technology solutions or customizing gadgets to function in the field. Improving connectivity and facilitating data collection are two ways technology is pushing conservation forward. Sharing information widely and quickly—often in near-real time—is also helping projects scale up like never before. WWF led the development of WILDLABS.net, which has been connecting field-based conservationists with technology experts since 2015. The crowdsourcing platform is a hub of engagement, helping users troubleshoot problems, source technology-enabled solutions, and launch new ideas, such as the latest #tech4wildlife project: a sensor so small that it can literally be deployed on a moth’s back into remote places to collect environmental data. Throughout our 60-year history, WWF has leveraged technology to tackle global conservation issues and make groundbreaking discoveries. We’ve used satellite collars to discover and track Africa’s longest zebra migration and positioned camera traps to document tigers in Bhutan. We’ve partnered with global tech companies to help them remove or block more than 3.3 million prohibited wildlife listings from online platforms. Our experts have also improved supply chain transparency, making it possible for consumers to trace the journey of wild-caught fish from bait to plate, and have equipped communities with tools to help them preserve their sources of food, water, and livelihoods. Now, across our network, we’re developing even more ambitious solutions. Read on for our roundup of the fresh tech that’s helping WWF scientists expand their understanding of the natural world and advance conservation. View all issues h