How an Alaska Native community in Bristol Bay protected its land, salmon fishery, and culture from a ruinous mining project But now a historical decision by Native landowners, in conjunction with a landmark proposal by the US Environmental Protection Agency, could finally rip Pebble Mine up from the roots and stop the project for good. “It's what we want,” Thiele says of the remote, rugged region of southwest Alaska. “It's how we want our lands. When I was a kid, it was just about the same, so for my kids to experience that, and now my grandkids are experiencing that—we just love it like this. We don't want development.” The sockeye salmon season itself is brief—only about a month long—but workers clock 16-hour shifts to take advantage of the window in June and July. During this time, harvesters net fish from 32-foot aluminum boats while tenders shuttle the catch to the shore where the salmon is processed immediately in boxy buildings with corrugated roofs weathered by the salt air. A good—or in this year’s case, great—run means that fishers can earn enough money for the whole year in just a handful of weeks. The immediate and long-term value of the fishery is in no way lost on those in the community. Numerous parked cars, road signs, and bulletin boards display a sticker with a red circle around and a line through the words “Pebble Mine.” Though the proposed mining site is far upstream, the ramifications of the extraction of materials would almost certainly decimate the salmon run. Any mine waste released into the surface or groundwater would endanger wildlife. “This is one of the last places on Earth that's undeveloped and has a renewable resource,” says Reuben Hastings, who serves as a fishing guide at a local lodge and began commercial fishing in middle school. “It's like a giant food truck that comes every year, and all you’ve got to do is take care of it. Why would you even do anything detrimental that might harm something like that?” Beverly Cloud is leaning forward against the kitchen counter of her Pedro Bay home, talking about how she spent summers in the village with her grandmother, learning how to put up fish. That fish—a single piece a day, the size of one’s palm—saved her grandmother from starvation at one point. Beverly Cloud’s light brown hair glances off her shoulders with every gesture. A resealable bag full of fireweed blossoms rests by her elbows. Now she brings her own children to this place that nourished those before her, teaching them what she knows. “We come down here every summer and we catch our fish and Chrissy's doing it now on her own,” she says, looking over to her daughter, Chrisdene Cloud, who sits in the adjoining living room, nodding her dark pixie haircut with a tender and specific deference. “She can run that smokehouse all on her own. That's just a tradition. Like, I came over here and my grandma taught me those things. It's just like a tradition.” Recently, Beverly Cloud and her small community made an extraordinary contribution to the protection of that way of life, not just in Pedro Bay, but throughout the entire Bristol Bay watershed. Like her neighbor Thiele, Beverly Cloud sits on the board of directors for the Pedro Bay Corporation, which comprises more than 200 shareholders of Aleut, Yupik, and Athabascan descent and ensures the financial independence of Alaska Natives by securing their corporation’s profitability long-term. The corporation owns and manages more than 92,000 acres of land positioned between the Pebble Mine deposit and the deepwater port where Pebble Limited Partnership would need to ship ore to processors and load supplies on trucks to carry to the mine. Mine developers proposed a transportation road that would hug Lake Iliamna through Pedro Bay village before moving inland across salmon streams and largely untouched land. In 2021, more than 90% of Pedro Bay Corporation’s 197 shareholders voted to protect their land—and consequently their heritage and culture—by allowing the environmental nonprofit The Conservation Fund to purchase development rights on more than 44,000 acres of land as conservation easements for $18.3 million. An additional $500,000 will go toward the nonprofit Pedro Bay Benefits Corporation for shareholder education and cultural benefits, along with scientific research. The easements will restrict the development of the land and prohibit any right-of-way agreements with the mine in perpetuity. Though well on their way to raising the necessary funds, The Conservation Fund and partner organizations still need to secure the remaining $5 million by the end of 2022. Back at Thiele’s home, the three daughters remove their work gloves under a bright sun that will refuse to set later that evening. Two of them climb into kayaks and slip off into the choppy waters of Lake Iliamna. Thiele—who also sits on the Pedro Bay Corporation board and voted against the road—watches them fight the wind as they paddle. This is their home for this week. And forever. “I'm just glad my kids want to come back and learn how to cut fish and learn the process of it all,” Thiele says. “I'm hopeful that way. I am hopeful that I don't think the village will die because the young people love it. I have hope there.” “ Learn more about Bristol Bay. Learn more about Bristol Bay. About the photographer: Brian Adams is an Inupiaq photographer based in Anchorage, Alaska, specializing in environmental portraiture. He is a co-founder of Indigenous Photograph. About the photographer: