AGE 30 AGE HOME Amsterdam, Netherlands HOME CAUSE Negin Mirsalehi is a blogger and fashion icon with an Instagram following 5 million strong and growing. Her interest in protecting pollinators and the wild places they call home inspired her to become a WWF Ambassador. CAUSE Why are you passionate about conservation? Is there a certain issue that’s particularly important to you?
My entry to conservation was honeybees. Beekeeping has been in my family for six generations, and I have fond memories of spending Sundays in the bee garden with my father. Now, native bees and other animal pollinators—which support an estimated one out of every three bites of food we eat—are rapidly vanishing. Much of this is due to changes we’re making to the land to expand our cities and farms. But we can find smarter ways to provide for humanity while protecting nature. Why are you passionate about conservation? Is there a certain issue that’s particularly important to you? Why do you support WWF as an ambassador?
Many people don’t get involved in conservation because they feel the problem is too big. And it’s true that we face intimidating challenges—climate change, mass extinctions, pollution. But then you see the work that WWF is doing, and you realize that smart, capable people are getting up every morning to tackle these issues. Their optimism is infectious, and the work they do touches everyone. I’m proud to stand with them. Why do you support WWF as an ambassador? In what other ways do you help save the planet? 
Instagram offers a powerful platform for sharing my thoughts on the environment and encouraging others to take action. I’ve also taken steps to reduce my ecological footprint. One step was switching to a mostly plant-based diet—partly because of how meat production helps drive global warming,* and partly because animal welfare is near to my heart. And I really believe in people’s basic goodness. I believe we can and will do what’s needed to save the planet. In what other ways do you help save the planet? *According to the UN Food and Agriculture Organization, total emissions from global livestock represent 14.5% of all human-generated greenhouse gas emissions. View all issues h