Three endangered Indus river dolphins safely tagged in Pakistan In a major boost to the conservation of the endangered Indus river dolphin, WWF experts in collaboration with the Sindh Wildlife Department safely tagged three dolphins in Pakistan with satellite transmitters in January 2022. The satellite tags that were used were made by wildlife experts in the US, and the protocol that was followed to attach them to the dolphins was based on methods used by the Chicago Zoological Society’s Sarasota Dolphin Research program. This is the first time that such technology has been used on any of the river dolphin species in Asia. The three river dolphins—two adult females and a young male—were tagged after being rescued from irrigation canals in Sukkur, before being successfully released back into the Indus River. The dolphins were tagged with the utmost care, with a veterinarian administering local anesthesia before applying the tags. Preliminary satellite data appears to show that the technology is working and scientists are expecting unprecedented information about the dolphins in the coming weeks.

“This pioneering project is a major milestone for the long-term conservation of the Indus river dolphin as we are expecting it to reveal a wealth of information about the movement, behavior, and habitats of this iconic species,” said Dr. Uzma Khan, Asia Coordinator for WWF’s River Dolphin River Initiative, who led the tagging team. “Tagging dolphins is new to Pakistan and we are pleased to contribute to this pioneering study in Asia,” said Javed Mehar, Conservator Sindh Wildlife Department. “If this experiment is successful then the government of Sindh will carry this initiative forward and scale it up.”

The Sindh Wildlife Department leads efforts every year to rescue Indus river dolphins that become stranded in irrigation canals. Working with WWF and communities, the department has successfully rescued about 200 dolphins since 1992.

Satellite tagging of river dolphins was pioneered in South America, where around 50 Amazon river dolphins have been successfully tagged, providing critical information for conservation. A Yangtze finless porpoise - the only species of freshwater porpoise - was also tagged once in China.

“Collective efforts are key to saving river dolphin species across Asia but until now we have been working in the dark, blind to the details of how these animals behave: satellite tagging promises to shine a much-needed light on their habits and movements,” said Daphne Willems, Lead, WWF River Dolphin Rivers initiative.

“I cannot wait to start seeing the data and finding out where exactly these dolphins go when they are out-of-sight below the surface of the Indus," added Willems.