Brenda Brady’s red hoodie provides a splash of color against Montana’s fall landscape as she bends down to see how the forage is faring in a recently reseeded cattle pasture. Behind her stands a 4x4 Chevy truck, which has replaced the horses her great-grandparents rode to survey these lands. The tract on which she stands used to be cropland, but now she’s in the business of growing grass. On pastures like this, “the goal is to not have bare ground, but to have litter, or what we call the debris,” she explains, plucking a tuft of dry grass. “You want litter—still standing grass—of varying heights. With new seeding, you’re going to have some bare ground that will fill in over time.” A couple of hours ago, a brief shower passed through—a blessing, given the drought-like conditions that have plagued the area in recent years. When it does fall, the rain replenishes the native plants—the slender wheatgrass, western wheatgrass, bluebunch wheatgrass, green needlegrass, and flax—that keep her cattle fed, provide habitat for native species, protect the health of the soil, and store carbon in the ground. Brady’s ranch is in Winnett, in Petroleum County—one of the United States’ 15 most rural counties, where approximately 75% of income is generated by agriculture and communities are like close-knit families. Before European settlement here in the late 1800s, Indigenous peoples lived off the plentiful wildlife the land sustained. Today, the large bison herds have been replaced by cattle, but birds such as mountain plovers, chestnut collared longspurs, and Sprague’s pipits are still found alongside deer, elk, and rarer species like swift fox, in habitat managed by ranchers.

But across the Great Plains, the large-scale conversion of native grasslands to cultivated crops, resource extraction, and other development have driven widescale destruction and fragmentation of this carbon-rich landscape, pushing species such as pronghorn and the greater sage-grouse into shrinking and degraded swaths of habitat. And the area is on the cusp of more dramatic change.

WWF’s 2021 Plowprint Report revealed that grassland plow-up across the Great Plains has continued to accelerate for the second year in a row. The data shows that from 2018 to 2019 about 2.6 million acres of grassland—an area larger than Yellowstone National Park—were plowed up, primarily to make way for row crops. Almost 70% of new conversion across the Great Plains was for three crops that are grown primarily for food and fuel: corn (25%), soy (22%), and wheat (21%).

In addition to impacting wildlife habitat, these changes release enormous amounts of carbon, exacerbate droughts and wildfires, and cause harmful soil degradation and erosion, threatening the interconnected livelihoods of rural ranching communities and the ecosystem they rely on. In both Winnett and Marfa, the shift in mindset is from raising cattle to growing grass. “I generally ask myself, what did it look like before we got here, and how can I mimic that? Because it was working extremely well and supporting an abundance of life,” says Wade, who increasingly sees himself as a custodian of the soil. “That’s what I need to take care of, and then the grass takes care of itself, and the cattle take care of themselves, because we’re mimicking what was going on here for eons,” he explains. Back in Winnett, Brady and Nowlin have similar ideas. “We’re not going to be successful as ranchers if we’re not aware of conservation,” says Brady. “For us, as far as ranching goes, it’s a business taking care of the soil and the grass and the wildlife, and trying to do what’s best for the land.” These growing collaborations between ranchers and conservation groups, which look at ranching through a nature-focused lens, address both the threats of agriculture to land and water and the threats faced by producers and food crops throughout the connected Great Plains landscape. View all issues h