Herders, rangers, and researchers share insights into living with free-roaming lions and measures like early warning systems that help keep people, livestock, and lions safe Ovahimba herder Tjimbari Kamendu anxiously awaits news of a pride of lions sighted close to his kraal –or livestock pen— in the village of Omukutu, inside the Anabeb Conservancy in northeast Namibia. It's a wild landscape grazed for centuries by livestock guided by local herders. Here, there are no fences to separate people and wildlife. A nearby seasonal waterway sustains cattle, goats, and donkeys alongside elephants, oryx, and zebras. Villagers have made some accommodations for the hyenas and lions that share this landscape: the wooden kraals are wrapped with dark cloth. This keeps the goats hidden at night when these predators hunt. Kamendu has never actually seen a lion. He fears them but is also pragmatic about their presence in the landscape. "I have been taught about them and their tracks because they have always been here," he says. Lion Rangers wear out several pairs of boots a year as they trek the remote, hard-to-reach areas that the lions, prey, and livestock roam. Their data inform livestock owners, researchers, and conservationists about lion movements. They also work with rapid response teams that help implement safe and tested non-invasive methods to move lions out of an area, like setting contained fires, playing loud music, using strobe and spotlights, and driving perimeter patrols with vehicles. The work of lion ranger patrols and rapid response teams is complemented by high-tech collars that inform landscape-level approaches to lion conservation and conflict mitigation. Not far from Kamendu's village, in the Etendeka Concession, Namibia Ministry of Environment, Forestry and Tourism Large Carnivore Coordinator Uakendisa Muzuma; Dr. John Heydinger, a conservation biologist; and Dr. Diethardt Rodenwalt, a veterinarian, are working with Lion Rangers to collar another group of lions. "They are up there, on that hillside," says Heydinger, indicating a distant green bush as a landmark. He sketches a safe approach in the sand and activates the collars. Rodenwaldt’s medical box is carefully packed for easy access, and he has a stethoscope and stopwatch hung around his neck. "When it happens, it happens fast. The lion’s wellbeing is our priority," he notes as they head over the rugged ankle-twisting hillside to where the lions are. Sometimes, finding and tracking lions takes days on foot amongst the craggy buttes, windswept canyons, or swathes of golden-maned savannah. This is the work of the Lion Rangers. Not all attempts to dart lions are successful, as they are wary of humans and quick to disappear, but the team is patient. "The satellite collars let us remotely monitor individual lions in hard-to-reach areas. These lions either play a central role in the population's social dynamics or are likely conflict-causing individuals,” says Heydinger. While collar data contributes to research, the collars serve a more immediate purpose in villages with lions' early warning systems. They communicate with a tower placed in villages to warm farmers when lions are nearby. When a collar comes close to a tower, farmers and the lion rangers get SMS alerts detailing lion locations, and a series of lights and sirens alert farmers to the lion's presence. The desert-dwelling lions are a behaviorally-adapted population that can withstand climate extremes and long travel. As a result, they present a unique set of problems for residents and any meaningful progress in addressing human-lion conflict will be locally driven and inclusive. That’s why the Lion Rangers work closely with the residents who bear the brunt of the risk associated with living with predators.