The sounds of squabbling baboons and squawking guinea fowl greet Tjavarekua Tjijahura as she rises to prepare breakfast and break camp. She is wearing the traditional clothes of Ovaherero women—petticoats, a voluminous dress with vibrant patterns, and a hornlike headscarf that pays homage to part of her identity: The Ovaherero people are historically cattle breeders, and raising livestock is a common way of life. The Ovaherero experience of human-wildlife coexistence is far from unique in Namibia. When the country gained independence from South Africa in 1990, protection of the environment was enshrined in the constitution—and included the sustainable use of Namibia’s natural resources for the benefit of all Namibians. In 1996 the Nature Conservation Amendment Act put the rights to, and responsibilities for, conserving wildlife in the hands of the communities living with it. The ground-breaking law emphasized local control and encouraged communities to organize themselves as conservancies to manage and benefit from wildlife on their communal lands. In the decades that followed, the conservancy model flourished and conservancies multiplied. Today there are 86 conservancies covering nearly 65,000 square miles, or 20% of Namibia—the highest percentage of community management in a single nation worldwide. The country’s wildlife populations, from critically endangered black rhinos to desert-adapted lions, have contributed to a tourism economy that employs thousands and generates more than 14% of Namibia’s GDP. WWF has supported the conservancy program for more than 25 years. Working alongside the Ministry of Environment, Forestry and Tourism, and with the support of WWF and a host of other organizations, the conservancies hope to secure the legal status of Ombonde and, in doing so, establish their right to control access to defined wildlife areas. At present, unguided cross-country tourists drive through for free. Establishing tourism zones to which the conservancies have sole management rights, says Muzuma, would bring in much-needed jobs and development and “change the living standard of the people on the ground.” In addition, under the future park’s management plan, community members would continue to be able to use the area for emergency livestock grazing in the event of drought—a constant threat in this arid landscape. Chief Kenamurire Kasaona, a traditional leader, conservancy member, and liaison for Integrated Rural Development and Nature Conservation (IRDNC)—an NGO that has played a leading role in establishing and supporting conservancies—says he is proud of how Namibia is righting historical wrongs. In giving conservancies responsibility for managing wildlife, Namibia began to restore precolonial practices. Under colonization, he says, game animals were officially owned by the state. Conservation efforts ignored local knowledge and excluded rural people from decision-making. This deprived the people who lived with wild animals and competed with them for water and grazing lands of the benefits of tourism, hunting, and resource use. Allowing conservancies to control access to their core wildlife zones would further empower communities and expand the conservancy model’s gains. “The vision for this conservation area has been to ensure animals can move freely and that people can benefit from this for generations to come,” says John Kasaona, executive director of IRDNC (and a relative of the chief). His father was one of the first game guards recruited when the conservancy program was in its infancy—a poacher turned protector. “My dad, and the men he worked with, would be so happy to see what’s happened in Namibia,” he says. “They went through many hurdles for the conservancy model to get where it is now. I’m sure they are smiling, wherever they are.” In an area known as Little Serengeti for its sprawling grasslands, craggy buttes, and deep, windswept canyons, oryx and springboks dot the wild landscape and giraffes use their long purple tongues to pluck at camel thorn leaves. “Wild animals can be hard to live with,” says Chief Kasaona. “Still, people want them here. They want measures in place to prevent [human-wildlife] conflict. But they don’t want the animals to be taken away.” Lions pose a particular challenge. Following the advent of Namibia’s conservancy system, the lion population increased nearly fourfold (after nosediving for much of the 20th century). Although their population numbers fluctuate, the big cats’ range has expanded. A recent prolonged drought has thrust wildlife and livestock into ever-closer proximity, and close quarters can spark conflict: Lions, hyenas, and other predators have been responsible for thousands of livestock attacks. Retaliatory killings are the number one cause of mortality for juvenile and adult lions in northwest Namibia. In a village near the proposed Ombonde park, Himba herder Tjimbali Kamendu lives a simple life in a mud-daubed hut not far from the folds and whorls of one of the ephemeral rivers that offer vegetated pathways through the landscape. Kamendu spends his days watching over his goats in the veld or taking them to the water to drink. Goats are core to people’s livelihoods here; Kamendu says he knows immediately if one is missing. This is where the Lion Rangers, conservancy-employed game guards, come in. Working with researchers and the government, rangers proactively manage conflict by fitting lions with collars that communicate with receptors in villages. This early-warning system alerts villagers when lions are nearby and allows them to track how close the lions are and in which direction they’re moving; in addition, solar-powered lights and sirens keep lions away from livestock kraals. “The farmers are feeling very good about this system in terms of preventing livestock losses by knowing when there is a collared lion around,” says ranger Jendery Tsaneb. He says farmers have become critical partners who help them do their job by sharing information. “If they see a lion which is not collared, they tell us,” he says. Perhaps the best example of Namibians’ willingness to protect their wildlife? The black rhino. Today, Africa’s largest free-roaming population moves throughout northwestern Namibia’s Kunene Region, where the rhinos are found not only in traditional protected areas like Etosha National Park (the rhinos’ heartland) but also on community lands, under the watch of conservancies. “It’s the only place in the world where you get free-roaming black rhinos living amongst communities,” says Simson Uri-Khob, CEO of Save the Rhino Trust. WWF is grateful for generous support from the Bezos Earth Fund, USAID, and many others whose commitment to community-centered conservation in Namibia is helping to ensure a sustainable future for its people and protect the country’s wildlife and natural resources for generations to come. View all issues h