WWF's Black Rhino Range Expansion Project (BRREP) in South Africa began in 2003 and, thanks to a dedicated team, has grown to be a massive success. A critical part of that team is Dr. Jacques Flamand, the veterinarian who leads the project. Can you tell us a little about yourself and background? Can you tell us a little about yourself and background? As a child, growing up exposed to the wilds of South Africa and being inspired by books like Jock of the Bushveld, I always wanted to be an explorer or a game ranger. My father always said “get a profession that lets you do what you like”. So, I hit on becoming a vet, obtaining my veterinary degree from Cambridge University in the United Kingdom. During my schooling, I was lucky enough to spend long summer vacations in Kenya and Uganda, thanks to our lecturers’ working relationships in East Africa. Those experiences exposed me to the veterinary work that I am still doing today. After attending university, I returned to South Africa where I completed my post-graduate degree in wildlife management, becoming the only field vet at Kruger Park in 1975. Afterwards, I worked for the then-Natal Parks Board (now KwaZulu Natal Wildlife provincial conservation organization) for 14 years, helping to capture and relocate some 700 white rhino in my first two years there. I was then asked to lead an effort against a tuberculosis (TB) outbreak among the rare Arabian oryx in Saudi Arabia, spending over six years dealing with the outbreak. When TB was discovered in the oryx, due to the rarity of this species, I decided to isolate and treat all the infected animals. I also removed the calves at birth to create a new, clean generation–something that had never been done on animals before. This new generation grew up to be free of TB and could be released into the wild, a huge success for this rare species. Given the amount of land each individual rhino should have, to translocate them in groups of 20, we needed to find areas of land that were around 77 square miles per group. There was no money to buy such land so my job was to seek out suitable land and to create partnerships between landowners who would be passionate enough to devote their land to black rhino conservation, and who had the resources to do so. Most ranches that expressed interest were too small to qualify alone, so we negotiated with neighbouring landowners to drop the fences that separated their properties and blend their lands to create viable, large blocks of habitat for the rhinos. The project started in 2003 and since then, we have created 12 new black rhino populations in South Africa and one in Malawi. In 2019, we reached a major milestone – our 200th black rhino was relocated – and as of today, we have moved 216. Of the 12 populations of rhinos we’ve translocated, five now live among local community-owned lands in some form or another, thereby making local communities real stakeholders in rhino conservation. More populations are envisaged but it is becoming increasingly difficult to find large blocks of land, and the prospect of black rhino on one’s land is less attractive due to the costs of protecting them from the increasing poaching pressures. What’s a memorable experience or story you can share from your work with rhinos? What’s a memorable experience or story you can share from your work with rhinos? There are so many but one the stands out is from when I was working for the Natal Parks Board. Back then, we didn’t have helicopters to work with routinely so I had to dart all game, including black rhinos, on foot. Because they are an endangered species, I’d also have to examine any injured black rhinos to determine whether they needed medical attention, and this could be dangerous.