Dear Madam,ADVERTISEMENTI am pursuing my first year engineering in CS branch. I am aspiring to do Masters in Science or MS in Computer Science. I have heard that IITs do not offer MS but only MTech. Please suggest if it is better to do MS in foreign countries? If so, which universities are good for MS with a budget of Rs 20 to 30 lakh? Which universities are good in India? Also, suggest exams and preparation for entering into those universities.Shrestha S BharadwajDear Shrestha,Admission to an MS program in a foreign country is easier than getting into an IIT. MTech / MEng / MS / MSc / MRes, are all different titles used by different countries and institutions. For a Master’s program in computer science with a budget of Rs 20 to 30 lakh including tuition and living expenses, I would recommend University of Canterbury in New Zealand. Their computer science programs are among the top one per cent in the world. You also get a 3-year post-study work visa here. Other affordable options within your budget include Anglia Ruskin University, Middlesex University, Nottingham Trent University and Sheffield Hallam University in UK; NYIT and Trent University in Canada. The only test you need to take for New Zealand and UK is the IELTS academic. For Canada, you also need to take the GRE. For more options in other countries, visit www.umaaswani.comDear Madam,I am a 12th standard student, I would like to do engineering in animation after my 12th. For this, I would like to go abroad, especially to Singapore. Please suggest some good universities. I would also like to know about the scholarships those universities offer. PriyankaDear Priyanka,The best universities to pursue an Engineering degree in Singapore are National University of Singapore and Nanyang Technological University. The Government of Singapore provides tuition subsidies which come in the form of tuition grants and are administered by the Ministry of Education (MOE) and offered to all admitted students. International students who receive tuition grants will have to sign an agreement with the Ministry of Singapore and work in Singapore based companies for a period of three years after their education.Dear Madam,I am a 4th-year veterinary student, can you please suggest on my further studies in veterinary science abroad? What should I do if I want to practise there and in which country is my degree (BVSc &AH) valid?LikhithaDear Likhitha,Your four-year degree is valid in every country and you can choose to pursue your Masters anywhere you wish. MVSc courses are offered in many universities across the world. Countries like UK, Australia and New Zealand offer a range of Masters Programmes in veterinary science. The course would be for one year in the UK and 1.5 to 2 years in other countries. The only entry requirement would be a good GPA in your BVSc and a high score in the IELTS exam.Some of the specializations are Veterinary Parasitology, Epidemiology, Infection and Disease Control, Infection and Immunity, Conservation Science, Wildlife health and Conservation, Animal Bioscience, Applied Animal behaviour and Animal welfare etc.Dear Madam,I am a civil graduate. I want to study Masters in either Australia or New Zealand. Which is the best place for civil engineers, with respect to education and PR. I have completed my engineering a year ago with 65%. I have a GRE score of 309 and IELTS 8. And also, I am confused whether to opt for Masters in Civil Engineering or Construction Management, because Construction Management is not on the Australian skilled occupation list. RajDear Raj,Masters in Civil engineering is more popular in Australia and New Zealand. At the moment, there is a huge requirement for civil engineers in Christchurch as they are rebuilding the entire city. Construction Management or Project Management is offered largely in UK, US, Germany, Ireland and Canada.If you are keen on long-stay visas or PR, I suggest you go to countries like New Zealand, Australia, Canada and Ireland. Dear Madam,I am currently pursuing my BArch. I’ve heard that the course does not have much scope in India. I would like to know about the universities abroad. The tuition fees, living expenses, etc. I would prefer a country other than the United States. Is it worth pursuing MArch abroad? DeepthiDear Deepthi,It certainly is a good idea to pursue your MArch abroad. Here are some suggestions of countries and universities:In Germany, some of the best schools to study architecture are Stuttgart State Academy of Art and Design, The RWTH Aachen, TUM Munich, Technical University of Dresden and Bauhaus – Weimar University. Most public universities are free. Other private universities charge a nominal fee. Education in Germany is very affordable, your main expenses being living costs.In Canada, some of the good universities for MArch are University of British Columbia, McGill, Toronto, Waterloo, Ryerson, Carleton, Calgary and Dalhousie. Tuition and living costs together will be around Rs 30 to 35 lakh a year for two years.UK has some of the best schools like Cambridge, UCL, Nottingham Trent, Sheffield, Cardiff, Westminster and City University among others. All universities in England offer one year Masters programmes. So, you end up saving on living expenses. Your entire costs will be around Rs 20 to 25 lakh depending on the university.The other top European schools for architecture are The Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts Copenhagen, Denmark, Technical University of Delft, Netherlands, Institute of Advanced Architecture of Catalonia, Spain and ETH Zurich, Switzerland.Dear Madam,I am currently in my first year engineering under E&C branch. I still have an option to change my branch to CS. So, should I continue to be in EC or shift to CS if I want to pursue my MS in cybersecurity or artificial intelligence?Abhishek MudaliarDear Abhishek,Universities abroad are not very rigid. As long as you have an Electrical / Electronics / Computer Science background, you can pursue your MS in cybersecurity or artificial intelligence. If you are enjoying your current choice of Electronics and Communication Engineering, I see no reason for you to switch to Computer Science.