Up against an old enemy
ADVERTISEMENTSuperman Returns’ airs on HBO at 9 pm on September 18. Superman had left on a long vacation to explore the leftovers of his destroyed home, Planet Krypton. 

He returns to become Clark Kent (played by Brandon Routh) and finds out that Lois Lane (essayed by Kate Bosworth) has not only written a Pulitzer Prize-winning work called ‘Why the World Doesn’t Need Superman?’, but is also married with a child. Lois still has feelings for Superman, and it looks like the world needs the absent superhero after all. 

Lex Luthor (Kevin Spacey) is out of prison, and his only ambition is to kill Superman. 
When Lex comes up with a new plot to destroy a large part of the USA and turn it into the Mall of Luthor, Superman must defeat his greatest enemy all over again.

Death-defying bus ride

Catch ‘Speed’ on Star Movies at 6.30 pm on September 18. 
Howard Payne threatens to kill people with explosives, unless paid heavily by the government. 

He is about to get the money when Jack, a rookie cop, stops him. Payne manages to escape Jack and his partner Harry. 

A short time later, he manages to plant a bomb on a bus. Everything’s going good until the bus crosses a certain speed — now, it has to keep at 50 miles per hour to stop the bomb from exploding. Will Jack be able to come to the rescue now? Watch the movie to find out.

What could be the motive?

Catch Is Pyaar Ko Kya Naam Doon on Star Plus at 8 pm on September 18. In tonight’s episode, emotions are at an all-time high. Dadi accepts Khushi as the member of the Raizada family — even after she finds out the truth.What is going on in dadi’s mind? To find out, catch the show.

Different strokes for different folks

Reality show enthusiasts have reason to celebrate — Bigg Boss Season 6, Alag Che (meaning different) is back. The show is being touted as a wholesome family entertainer and once more, Salman Khan will add a bit of glamour by hosting the show.

Speaking on the alag factor this season, Salman Khan says, “Bigg Boss Season 6 will connect with the whole family this time — there will be a lot of fun while watching the nok-jhonk between the housemates. Just like every happy family that has different strokes for different folks, the Bigg Boss house will also have different personalities, along with their quirks and eccentricities.

 So be ready with your family members to watch these new twists and turns, whether sitting on the couch or while you’re at your dinner table.”

Home of the dinosaurs

The Lost World: Jurassic Park’ stars Jeff Goldblum, Julianne Moore, Vince Vaughn, Pete Postlethwaite and Vanessa Lee Chester. Four years after the failure of Jurassic Park, where the genetically-bred dinosaurs went on a rampage, multimillionaire John Hammond reveals that he had been breeding more dinosaurs at a secret location. 

Malcolm, his girlfriend and a wildlife video producer join Hammond on an expedition to this secret island to check out the beasts. Watch the movie on September 18 at 9 pm on Movies Now.

(TV SHOW TIMINGS ARE SUBJECT TO CHANGE)