Heroic actionsADVERTISEMENTHBO presents See It First every Sunday at 9 pm. On November 21, watch Observe And Report starring Seth Rogen, Anna Faris, Michael Pena and Celia Weston. 

At the Forest Ridge Mall, head of security Ronnie Barnhardt patrols his jurisdiction with an iron fist, combating skateboarders, shoplifters and the occasional unruly customer while dreaming of the day when he can wap his flashlight for a badge and a gun. That day comes when the mall is struck by a flasher... and Ronnie chooses to do more on the job than just observe and report.  Ronnie’s delusions of grandeur drive him to showcase his underappreciated law enforcement talents, hoping to nab the flasher and win the heart of his elusive dream girl, Brandi, the hot make-up counter girl. However, Ronnie’s actions launch a turf war with equally competitive Detective Harrison of the local police department. Now, Ronnie must not only catch the flasher, but he must do it before the real police can.Desolated yet fascinatingDiscovery Channel presents Into Alaska With Jeff Corwin on November 21 at 9 pm. Enter a land of superlatives — America’s highest mountain, its greatest wilderness, its fiercest animals and its loneliest land. Alaska is a state in which a population less than New York City spreads out over an area three times the size of Texas. Tour the length and breadth of this spectacular place with noted zoologist and anthropologist Jeff Corwin, America’s ultimate tourist in America’s ultimate location to find its amazing wildlife.A fantasy-filled journey  Watch two back-to-back entertainers on WB on November 20. At 9 pm, watch I Am Legend starring Will Smith, Alice Braga and Charlie Tahan. Will Smith stars as the last healthy human living on earth after a biological war... but he is not alone. The other humans have become vampire-like mutants, and all are hungry for his blood. By day, he is the hunter, stalking the sleeping undead through the abandoned ruins of civilisation. By night, he barricades himself in his home and prays for the dawn.

Queen Of The Damned starring Stuart Townsend, Aaliyah and Marguerite Moreau at 11 pm. After a slumber spanning decades, the vampire Lestat becomes a rock star whose music awakens the queen of all vampires, Akasha, who embarks on a mission to make Lestat her king. But a young London woman with a gift for the occult falls in love with Lestat and wields a far greater power than the vampires expect.Pamela has two admirers in the ‘Bigg Boss’ houseFormer Baywatch star Pamela Anderson is finally adding some spice to Indian reality show Bigg Boss 4. After gyrating to Bollywood number Dhak dhak karne lagaa, she went ahead and sunbathed with actor Ashmit Patel. Anderson, who entered the show on Tuesday night, wore a short blue spaghetti top teamed with skin tight shorts as she sunbathed in the garden of the Bigg Boss house in Lonavala, said a source.

Ashmit, her biggest fan in the house, joined her. He chose to remain bare bodied, and wore a blue and fluorescent orange trunks.

Ever since Anderson entered the show, Ashmit and model Hrishant Goswami have been smitten by her, trying to gain attention.

In the meantime, the 43-year-old international star, has been trying everything 
Indian – including the dress, food and the typical Bollywood dance.

She wore a sari with bindi, bangles and jhumkas for her entry on the show, and even gorged on paranthas. For one of the tasks on the show, Anderson even learned 
Bollywood moves to Madhuri Dixit’s sensational song Dhak dhak karne lagaa.Some action on weekendOn November 20, at 9 pm, HBO is showing Land of the Lost starring Will Ferrell, Danny McBride and Anna Friel. 

Has-been scientist Dr Rick Marshall gets more than he bargained for when he’s sucked into a time vortex and spat back through time into the Land of the Lost. With no weapons, few skills and questionable smarts, Dr Marshall must survive in this alternate universe full of marauding dinosaurs and fantastic creatures from beyond our world!It’s ‘Matrix’ time for film lovers  As part of the Matrix series, watch The Matrix Reloaded starring Keanu Reeves, Carrie-Anne Moss, Laurence Fishburne and Hugo Weaving November 21 at 9 pm on WB. In the second chapter, Zion falls under siege to the Machine Army. Only hours before 250,000 sentinels destroy the last human enclave on Earth, Neo and Trinity choose to return to the Matrix with Morpheus, unleashing their extraordinary skills and weaponry.
On November 21 at 11.40 pm, watch The Matrix Revolutions. In this explosive final chapter, Neo, Morpheus and Trinity battle to defend Zion against the onslaught of the machines. And, now as Neo learns more about his heroic powers , he faces the consequences of the choice made in The Matrix Reloaded.