Chitra Ramaswamy writes about the natural therapy the state of Sikkim offers its visitors with its scenic environs and religious flavour...

ADVERTISEMENTFew places you visit kindle that profound, soul-searching desire to introspect and take a peek into the deep recesses of your core being and make you almost one with the Divine. Even if only for a short time. And this is what happened to me when I visited Sikkim. If Kerala is God’s Own Country, I choose to call Sikkim ‘a land where God has come down to Earth to tread the lap of nature softly and serenely.’ The radiant glow of sunshine the Almighty casts in this land, I feel, is a veritable balm to soothe every aching and thirsting soul. Even as I set foot on this soil, I realise that Sikkim is going to be a spiritual adventure of sorts.

We check into a hotel in Gangtok, the Sikkimese capital, which we use as base to tour its surrounds. We hire a vehicle for the duration of our stay and with Longfu as chauffeur and guide, embark on a sojourn that is to become our out-of-the-world experience. Nature, no matter to which part of Sikkim you travel, is draped in grandeur. Dense, luxuriant forests, crystal-clear streams, stretches of exotic blossoms, untamed and magnificent mountains are everywhere in Sikkim. I feel I am transported heavenwards as I spin myself in a dreamy rhapsody on a floating paradise. Clouds and mist envelop me in their caressing arms as much as they embrace the mountains over which they alternately swirl and hang.

Serene surrounds

Nestled in the midst of the towering Khangchendzonga or Kangchenjunga ranges, Sikkim is an oasis of natural beauty in India’s northeastern corner, boasting amazing contours, colours, flag-festooned villages and intrinsic life rhythms. I feel an instant communion with the Creator as I soak in the grandeur of bountiful Nature. As I stand and stare at my environs, so pure and rich, superlatives elude me. My holiday here, I feel, is a much-needed surcease from the mundane, pressure-ridden routine in which I have trapped myself. Yet again, I’m compelled to say that Sikkim is a voyage into the realms of meditation, a delving into the inner self, even an elixir for my perplexed soul.

We begin our explorative sojourn with Gangtok’s M G Marg and Lal Bazaar. The architectural splendour of the city with its pagoda-like wooden houses casts a magical spell on us with the sheer colour and the smiling faces of the Sikkimese people. I am reminded of Barcelona’s La Rambla as we stroll down M G Marg with its bustling eateries and vibrant shops selling a medley of wares, from clothes to crockery, electronics, artefacts and souvenirs. We merge with the melee and enter an eatery serving vegetarian fare to try some of the most yummilicious ethnic cuisine. We partake of vegetable momos accompanied by the trademark sweet and spicy tomato achar, and sel roti with Mesu Pickle — made from fermented bamboo shoot, and round off with Chhurpi-Ningro Curry, a simple yet scrumptious dish.

It’s evident that religion is an integral aspect of the routine life of the Sikkimese people. Longfu informs us that there are at least 200 monasteries spread over Sikkim, the epicentres of faith and the repositories of culture of the locals. We are a little puzzled by several white flags fluttering in some regions and hosts of coloured ones, even in the tiniest of hamlets, as we drive along the state’s winding roads. These, he says, are the prayer flags — the white ones hoisted as a mark of respect for the dead, and the flapping coloured flags in celebration of life. The monasteries have a wealth of artefacts, besides being architecturally delightful. One of the first such edifices we visit is the 200-year-old Enchey Monastery, built on the site believed to be blessed by Lama Druptob Karpo, a tantric master known for his power of flying.

Sights to behold 

While in Gangtok we visit the Chogyal Palden Thondup Memorial Park, the Orchid Garden, the Ridge and the White Hall, besides the Tashi View Point, Ganesh Tok, Hanuman Tok, the Saramsa Garden, Changu Lake and the monastery at Lingdum, all of which abound in colour and offer panoramic views of the city and its neighbourhood. The sprawling Himalayan Zoological Park is a revelation with its wildlife existing in very ambient surrounds.

Sikkim’s landscape is interwoven with a deluge of gurgling mountain streams that culminate, at several places, in enormous waterfalls. Fortunately, we could savour the beauty of the raging waters since we are in Sikkim just at the start of the monsoons.
 There are drizzles and mild showers, allowing the shutterbug in me to click away. For a short spell on a couple of days during our stay, we experience a good downpour. Our drive to Rumtek, at a distance of 25 km from Gangtok, is scenic. We roll down the windows of our car and take deep breaths of the fresh mountain air. Longfu deftly manoeuvres the vehicle through sharp hairpin bends.

There is colour everywhere as we enter Rumtek, Sikkim’s largest Buddhist monastery, perched on a hill facing Gangtok at 5,500 feet above sea level. Set in sylvan surroundings, Rumtek is bewitching in its beauty. It’s believed to embody the vision of Rangjung Rigpe Dorge, the 16th-century Karmapa who sought to establish his seat-in-exile here to spread the teaching of the Buddha throughout the world. The entrance to the main temple is adorned with murals, typical of traditional Tibetan monastic painting style. 

The interior of the Main Shrine Hall is resplendent in vibrant hues. It is a treasure trove of sacred objects, the most stunning piece of work being the Golden Stupa containing the invaluable relics of the Karmapa. The monastery complex comprises the monks’ quarters circumscribing a huge stone courtyard wherein ritualistic Lama Dance is performed to celebrate special occasions of the Tibetan calendar.

Commanding respect

Beauty is everywhere in Sikkim, overwhelming us in every direction we travel. We drink in lungful of cool, fresh mountain air that carries with it the sweet scent of wild blossoms. The place has about it a calm serenity in an exotic blend of finest sights, whether in the sweeping hills of paddy fields, the terraced tea gardens, the placid lakes often hidden inside dense foliages or the small hamlets in the midst of verdure, with valleys and mountains stretching beyond the horizon. I feel the visitors and tourists to Sikkim revere the calm the state is drenched in. For, the tranquility of the surrounds is broken now and then only by Nature itself — through the twitter of birds and rustling leaves, upon which a couple of canines tread without offering as much as a soft whine or whimper.