Amidst the hustle and bustle of daily life, it becomes imperative to take a break sometimes and escape to peaceful destinations. Weekends provide an opportunity to relax and on one such weekend, we decided to experience Kabini.

Where did we go?
It was Kabini Forest Reserve, situated on the banks of the Kabini River. It is one of the most popular wildlife sanctuaries in Karnataka, due to its accessibility, lush green landscape surrounding a large lake, and sightings of wildlife.

How did we go?
We set off at 5 am on a Saturday morning and drove for two hours until we reached our breakfast place Indradhanush. The distance from Bengaluru to Kabini is about 225 km via Mysuru and HD Kote.

The stay
Kabini River Lodge, managed by Karnataka Jungle Lodges and Resorts, is the ideal place to stay at in Kabini. An exquisite lodge that beckons with the promise of elephant, gaur, deer and tiger sightings. It speaks of a rich elegant ambience, cosy accommodation and a well-stocked bar called the Viceroy’s Bungalow. We reached at about lunch time and were warmly greeted by the staff. What caught our attention was a board with wildlife sightings at the entrance. This was the list of sightings at every safari. We were treated to sumptuous food and instructed to assemble at 3 pm for the evening safari.
 
What did we do?
We started off enthusiastically on our evening safari, with the chilly breeze blowing across our faces. A slight drizzle created the most apt weather to experience god’s wonderful creations. The lush green trees, the sounds of the chirping birds and the smell of the forest mud was a spectacular experience indeed. 

We spotted a herd of deer, beautiful peacocks, wild boars and gaur. Then the jeep suddenly halted. The naturalist asked us to keenly listen to the sound of a langur screaming out loud, later backed up by similar alarm calls by the spotted deer nearby. We were told that such sounds are called ‘warning calls’ or ‘alarm calls’. They are made when animals sense predators nearby. We sat glued to our seats waiting to see the after-effects. Onto to our right, we saw a herd of deer peacefully grazing on the lush green plants. On hearing the call, they leaped out into the bushes until we could see them no more.ADVERTISEMENT
On the left, behind a tree, stood the majestic wild cat gazing ferociously. A shiver ran down our spines looking at the beast five feet away. The tiger moved slowly across the road, crossed over to the right and growled in anger as he vanished into the bushes — perhaps, our presence hampered his meal. It was a lovely 20-minute visual treat of the wild. 
With fresh hopes, we set off on the early morning safari the next day. We witnessed a bunch of wild dogs, barking deer, peacocks, bisons and a couple of elephants taking a drink at the pond closely watched over by kingfisher birds and egrets. Thus, ended our spectacular tryst with nature. With fond memories, we drove back to Bengaluru on Sunday afternoon, totally rejuvenated.

(The author can be contacted at catherine.lilly@gmail.com)