Dandeli is a small town in Uttara Kannada district, which offers visitors a quiet vacation far from the maddening crowd. River Kali and the nearby forests offer visitors pleasant and surprising locations with crocodiles and a variety of birds.

The town also has a number of temples and mutts. 

In the old town, is located a temple for Dandelappa reputed to be the town’s founder. 

A big courtyard near the main street is the market yard that sells a variety of goods such as vegetables, fruits and food grains. 

The town hosts a number of industries thanks to the availability of abundant water. 

Industries of paper, paperboards, plywood and ferro industries thrive here. 

A few rice mills and saw mills are also located here. The town offers forest produce such as honey and crafts made from wood. 

A walk on the bridge over the river is a fascinating experience. 

The river flows quietly as water is regulated from the Supa Dam upstream. Small islands in the river have lush vegetation of bamboo and endemic trees and support a variety of water birds. 

Crocodiles lurk in the water ever ready to trap fish and birds.ADVERTISEMENT The nearby forest is a perfect place to discover nature. Malabar Hornbill is seen frequently with its distinctive beaks, plumage and bird call. 

Dandeli can act as a hub to tour nearby places. 

The Supa Dam near the village of Ganeshgudi over River Kali is about 22 km away. 

Entry gate to Dandeli Anshi Wildlife sanctuary with an area of 250 sq km is near the village of Phansoli which can be reached from the village of Kulgi, 8 km from Dandeli. 

Government owned jeeps are allowed to ply in the sanctuary for two hours between 6 am and 4 pm.

A minimum of six people are needed to get the jeep for a day.

Other places of interest nearby are Sykes Point near Ambikanagar, famous for fabulous views of the valley of river Kali inside the Dandeli Reserve Forest, which is 475 sq km away. 

There is a temple near by, on top of a small hill. This temple is inside Kavala Caves. Being a wildlife reserve, opportunities for trekking are less. 

Another place of interest is Ulavi, an important centre of pilgrimage. 

The Samadhi of Channabasavanna, one of the most revered saints of the 12th century lies here. 

Dandeli town is well connected by road to other towns. 

It has a number of hotels and lodges as well as restaurants that serve a variety of food. There are home stay facilities near the wildlife sanctuaries also. 

Local transport is through buses and auto-rickshaws and you can also hire taxis for visiting nearby places. 

A few tourist agencies arrange visits to wildlife sanctuaries, jungle walks, bird watching, trekking, jungle safari, stay at nature camps, kayaking, coracle ride, rafting and other adventure sports.