Heavy rain in the last three days triggered flash floods in parts of Bihar — where 41 people have died so far and 65.37 lakh affected — and inundated large areas in Assam and north Bengal, paralysing normal life and snapping rail link to the northeast.

In Uttarakhand’s Pithoragarh district, two separate incidents of cloudbursts claimed lives of six people while 10, including six army personnel, went missing.

The flood situation in Assam turned very critical with 32 lakh people in 25 districts affected. Three more persons lost their lives, taking the toll in the second wave of deluge in the state to 18.

In Arunachal Pradesh too, the flood situation continued to be grim in several districts with recurring landslides disrupting road traffic.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi spoke to the chief ministers of Bihar (Nitish Kumar) and Assam (Sarbananda Sonowal) and assured them of all support from the Centre.

Army, IAF in Bihar
Separate teams of the Indian Army, Indian Air Force (IAF), National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) and the State Disaster Response Force (SDRF) were pressed into service in different flood-affected districts of Bihar.

Chief Minister Nitish Kumar on Monday undertook an aerial survey of the worst-hit flood-affected districts — Kishanganj, Purnia, Katihar and Araria.

“Heavy rainfall in Nepal over the last few days has made rivers in Bihar, particularly Gandak, Mahananda, Kankai and Kosi, wreak havoc in different districts bordering the Himalayan kingdom,” said Nitish after winding up his visit.

Nitish, who earlier spoke to Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Home Minister Rajnath Singh and Defence Minister Arun Jaitley, expressed satisfaction over the Centre’s timely assistance.

At least 17 trains, including the New Delhi-Guwahati Rajdhani Express, were cancelled after flood water submerged railway tracks at the Kishanganj station.
Meanwhile on Monday, IAF choppers were used to distribute food packets among the flood-hit who were brought to relief camps or remained stranded on roads, particularly NH 31.

Assam toll at 102
According to Assam State Disaster Management Authority, the toll in this year’s flood-related incidents in the state climbed to 102. Till Sunday, 22.5 lakh people were hit by the latest wave of flood across 21 districts.

Dhubri is the worst affected with 7.79 lakh people affected by the deluge, followed by Morigaon where 3.83 lakh people have been hit.

Currently, the Brahmaputra is flowing above the danger mark at Guwahati, Nimatighat in Jorhat, Tezpur in Sonitpur, Goalpara and Dhubri towns.

The second wave of floods in Assam have submerged rhino habitats in Kaziranga National Park and Pobitora Wildlife Sanctuary, forcing the animals to take shelter on highlands.

According to an official, over 85% of the 430-sqkm Kaziranga National Park, is inundated.

Bengal wall collapse 
Though the incessant downpour eased a little on Monday in north Bengal, two persons died after a mud wall collapsed in Gangarampur area. However, the flood situation continued to remain grim across the entire region.

Train services to the Northeast from the rest of the country, which passes through a vast stretch of north Bengal, have been suspended till Wednesday due to floods and waterlogging on railway tracks in West Bengal and also in neighbouring Assam and Bihar.

North Bengal-bound trains and buses from Kolkata have also been suspended due to inundated tracks and waterlogging on major thoroughfares, including National Highways 31, 31D, 55 and 512.

A key bridge on NH 31D linking Falakata with Alipurduar was washed away in the wee hours of the day as the gushing waters of Torsha river hit it.ADVERTISEMENT