The move by the state government to construct the Bhairapura-Shishila road to connect to Dharmasthala in Dakshina Kannada has raised concern among environmentalists. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe environmentalists in Malnad have raised concern over the felling of trees and also impact on the source of water in Malnad and have called for a campaign to oppose the new road to conserve Western Ghats. A few villagers and influential persons have been demanding Shishila-Bhairapura road for the last three-and-half decades.

 “The proposal to get clearance from the Forest Department failed, however, three influential ministers of the government and two MLAs of the district are said to be secretly preparing the laying of the road,” charged activists of Bhadra Wildlife Conservation Trust, Wild Cat C and Nature Conservation Guild. 

The proposed road will pass through Balooru reserve forest in Chikkamagaluru, Miyaru reserve forest in Dakshina Kannada, Kabbinale and Shiradi reserve forest in Sakleshpura region. 

The region receives an average of 250 inches to 300 inches rainfall annually. A few of the rivulets joining river Nethravathi take birth in these reserve forests. On the other hand, trekking spots of Ombathukallu Betta, Ballalarayana Durga, Ettinabhuja, Karadibetta and Devaramane betta are situated by the stretch of the proposed road. 

The green activists feel that it is not right on the part of the state government to lay the Shishila-Bhairapura road as an alternate to the Charmadi and Shiradi roads. The government has already earmarked Rs 56 crore in the budget and has released Rs 17 lakh for the survey work. Bengaluru-based Preethi CAD Consulting Engineers Pvt Ltd has already completed the survey and submitted its report to the PWD. 

The Shishila-Bhairapura region has only a handful of villages. The density of population in these villages is thin. An attempt is made to get public support to generate employment in the form of hotels and shops beside the highway, felt the green activists. 

Bhadra Wildlife Conservation Trust head D V Girish said that the GPS survey was illegal and violation of the Forest Act. He added that the government has failed to upgrade the Shiradi and Charmadi roads. In the last six years, the Shiradi road has been concretised three times. In spite of it, the road is not conducive for smooth driving. The new road is nothing but an attempt to fill the pockets of bigwigs, he added.

The road

The distance between Mudigere and Bhairapura is 25 km and from Bhairapura to Holegandy to connect Kokkada in Dakshina Kannada is 10-15-km. One has to traverse 47 km from Holegandy to Ujire via Kokkada. If the new road is built, then the distance between Mudigere and Ujire would be 87 km. 

The present Mudigere-Charmadi-Ujire is only 57 km. The environmentalists suspect a hidden motive behind this new road. 

A senior official from PWD had raised doubts over getting clearance from the Forest Department as well as the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the proposed Shishila-Bhairapura road as it passes through Balooru reserve forest.