African termites do a lot of good

ADVERTISEMENTThe African savanna has a cornucopia of majestic creatures, lions, elephants and giraffes among them. But behind the scenes, it is the tiny termite that fuels much of this diversity, a new study reports. Researchers studying termites in Kenya’s central highlands found that the abundance of flora and fauna is markedly higher atop termite mounds.

“We noticed these circular green patches,” said Todd Palmer, the study’s lead author and a professor of biology at the University of Florida. “They had a lot of vegetation and plant material on top of them, and the grass was greener than in other areas.” The patches were 30 feet in diameter and spaced several hundred feet apart. Palmer and his colleagues found millions of termites in subterranean mounds. Quantitatively, they found that plants grow about 60 per cent larger on the patches compared with other areas. 

The nitrogen content of the plants on the mound is about 20 per cent higher, and trees on mounds bear 120 per cent more fruit. Animal populations also dropped off significantly the farther they were located from a patch.

Termite mounds are rich in nutrients like nitrogen and phosphorus, and termites also help loosen soil to promote water absorption, Palmer said. Other animals visit the lush patches to eat and end up defecating and urinating there, adding their own nutrients and triggering more plant growth.

In the human world, termites are seen as pests for their remarkable ability to eat into dead wood. But in the animal kingdom, Palmer said, this is what makes them so desirable. “In their absence, that would just lie there and there would be no way to break down the organic material and convert it to nitrogen and phosphorus,” he said.

Sindya N Bhanoo
NYT News Service

Oil spill clean-up draws flak

Post oil-spill, there is a growing army of clean-up workers, already thousands strong, that is advancing along hundreds of miles of Louisiana shoreline to combat the oily sludge that began washing up heavily weeks ago. Yet, the clean-up effort is drawing criticism as it unfolds on beaches, in the bayous and marshes. Environmentalists accuse workers of running roughshod over wildlife and delicate grasses. In Port Fourchon, vehicles have not only flattened sand dunes, one of the few lines of defense against erosion by the gulf waves, but have even plowed through nesting sites of birds. On the western end of Grand Isle, where crews filled thousands of bags with oily debris, local residents cited a dead dolphin that was buried rather than removed and about a dozen large redfish, dead and still covered with oil, that was thrown into the grasslands.

Local officials say incidents like the tossed redfish are perhaps unavoidable in such a large undertaking done mostly by a newly hired and quickly trained labour force. The oil has fouled the delicate marshes on Timbalier Bay, Lake Felicity and Lake Barre, which are important spawning grounds for brown shrimp.

Leslie Kaufman & James C Mc Kinley Jr
NYT News Service