In what may give enough fodder for the rivals of the Chief Minister Siddaramaiah, his close confidant Cooperation Minister H S Mahadeva Prasad and his family members are in trouble again over illegal quarrying that has already created ripples in political circles. 

ADVERTISEMENTA local BJP leader has lodged a complaint against three persons, including the minister, at Anti-corruption Bureau (ACB) police station, here on Monday.
L Suresh, a BJP leader, has named the minister, his son H M Ganesh Prasad and brother H S Nanjunda Prasad, in his complaint. This is the second complaint received at the newly created ACB station, and first in this regard.

According to the complaint, the minister and his family members are indulged in quarrying at Belachalavadi village (survey number 172), Hirikati (survey number 108), Kotekere (survey number 265) and Madahalli (survey number 192). Mining is done right up to the fringes of Bandipur National Park. 

The explosives used for mining has turned into a bane for the wildlife, the complaint stated. 

It also stated that unabated mining can be observed at the ‘gomaala’ of the above mentioned and surrounding villages, which has been posing threat to the health of the villagers. Deep mining is said to be the reason for depleting water table in the region. It is also very near to the eco-sensitive zone, but the deputy commissioner, departments of Mines and Geology and Forest officials have turned a blind eye, said Suresh.

Penalised
Suresh has also stated that Ganesh Prasad had remitted a penalty of Rs 4 lakh for illegal stone quarrying at Belachalavadi (survey number 243), after he was penalised by the department of Mines and Geology on March 28.

Geologist Krishnaveni had imposed the fine and Ganesh Prasad had also given an undertaking that he would not continue with the illegal mining activities. Suresh has enclosed the copy of the undertaking submitted to the office of deputy director, mines and geology, Chamarajanagar and demanded a judicial probe in this regard.