With less than two months left for Mysuru Dasara-2017, the Forest department is gearing up for Gajapayana, the ceremonial journey of Dasara elephants from the forests to Mysuru to participate in the Jamboo Savari.

This year Gajapayana, the first leg of Dasara, promises to be a grand affair as tourists can also participate in the event. Dasara–2017 will be celebrated from September 21.

Gajapayana is scheduled to be held on August 10 and eight elephants from different forests will be brought to Mysuru. 

The journey will begin from Veeranahosahalli forest in Nagarahole National Park, Hunsur taluk. The first batch of elephants include five tuskers – Abhimanyu, Arjuna, Balarama, Gajendra and Gopalaswamy and three females – Vijaya, Kaveri and Varalakshmi.

V Yedukondalu, Deputy Conservator of Forests (Wildlife), Mysore Circle, told DH that, “Gajapayana is the first leg of Mysuru Dasara and this year the event has been planned in a big and significant manner to give more exposure to the age-old tradition. Till now, though the event was significant, it was a simple programme with only tribals, a few people’s representatives and officials participating in the event.” 

The DCF said that in order to make the event a grand success, people and tourists will be allowed at the venue of Gajapayana. More than 5,000 people are expected to attend and Forest department plans to make necessary arrangements. 

The department has already begun necessary preparations and tenders have been floated for various works, he said. 

Publicity
The forest department plans to display boards about Gajapayana across Mysuru city, Mysuru-Bengaluru Highway and on Hunsur Road to attract and invite people to attend the event on August 10 and make it a success, the DCF said.

Documentary
Yedukondalu said that they are planning to make a documentary film on Gajapayana to popularise the event among people. The documentary would be screened in public places. “We have a few video clippings of previous year’s Gajapayana which would be used for the short film,” he said.ADVERTISEMENT