It sounds cliché but it is true — a picture is indeed worth a thousand words. And there was ample evidence of that at the World Photography Day celebrations organised by Maya Academy of Advanced Cinematics (MAAC) at Rangoli Art Centre in MG Road. The celebrations consisted of a screening of a wildlife documentary and a photo exhibition. 

ADVERTISEMENTSays Shajan Samuel, Senior Vice President of MAAC, “Recently we conducted a photography workshop in which renowned photographer Balamahesh from DCP spoke to over 100 enthusiasts about his experiences and shared tips and tricks on how to use the photographic lens as a medium of storytelling. At the end of the workshop, participants were assigned ‘light and shade’ as the subject for a photography contest. So as proponents of the art of photography, we decided to celebrate this day by holding an exhibition of the 30 best entries. The winners were given cash prizes of up till Rs 10,000.”

Hrishikesh Tiwari, third prize winner, says “I was walking around looking for a good shot. Then I saw a small plant growing inside the bark of a huge tree. The light falling on it was perfect and I clicked it on an impulse. I tried many angles but then I took it from a bottom angle to give it a different perspective.”

“Photography clears my mind. I find peace in clicking pictures. It is my passion right now but I want to transform it into a full-time career,” he adds. Gurubasavaraj, the first prize winner says, “I was not very clear about the concept of ‘light and shade’ initially. I was simply shooting random things when an ant on the ground captured my attention. The light falling on it gave a brilliant hue to the entire scene. I zoomed in and focussed on the insect. But when I submitted the photo, I never thought it would emerge as the winning entry.”

The charm of photography attracted even casual visitors to the gallery. Says Ashwini C, “I came here with my friend and these photos simply stunned me. I love nature photography specially even though I am not a photographer myself and this exhibition is a visual treat.”