For 10 year old Varun Bendre, it was a creative pang to capture the rising sun like a fruit on a tree. 

ADVERTISEMENTOn a trip to Bharatpur Bird Sanctuary with his mother Pradnya Bendre, the enthusiastic child got a hang of the camera within a day and clicked a beautiful picture titled ‘And let there be Light’!

Displayed as part of the fourth edition of ‘Nicefoto! – an international celebration of amateur photography’, the photograph has made its way through the works of 135 enthusiasts aged between seven years and 67, from across the world. All entries are competing for the first prize at the exhibition-cum-competition organised by Delhi Photography Club.  

One can say that these are aspirations of working professionals which are captured through lens. An example to explain this would be of Jai Thakur who started learning photography a year back and is today an avid traveller, courtesy his passion for photography. “I have covered about 19 cities and it was on one of my trips to Agra that I decided to do a 360 degree project on Taj Mahal,” says Thakur who was lured by the sight of a young girl standing by a colourful gate. He clicked her and titled the picture ‘100 grams of Hope’. “This girl is a dweller of the slums behind Taj Mahal,” informs the 27-year-old business analyst, referring to the juxtaposition of the beautiful monument and the slum behind it. 

Like Thakur, others too are in varied professions but the common thread that binds them is their love for photography. Away from their offices, when these amateurs make trips to different lands, they capture the place with whatever little they have learnt about the art of photography. “This is Silserh Lake in Alwar,” says 42-year-old Debajit Bose pointing at his photograph ‘Solitary Fisherman’. Though working in fraud management, Bose would be ready to quit his high paying job anytime to become a full time photographer. Such is his passion for the art that he clicked an astounding picture of the lake where the water appears black.

“It is a top angle shot at nine in the morning,” he chips in the information, much to the amazement of all the viewers.

Equally engaging is ‘The Giant Leap’in which 41-year-old Kunwar Narayan has managed to shoot a jumping black bug! “I was on a trip to Tal Chhapar Sanctuary with friends last year to take pictures of birds. We indeed spooked the black bugs and one of them jumped sideways enabling me to capture it,” says Narayan as one appreciates the right timing of the lensman who for a few years now has been into wildlife photography. 
The exhibition is on display at Open Palm Court Gallery, India Habitat Centre till July 24.