The residents of Kalathuru and Chara villages are worried over the proposed stone crusher (Jalli) unit. The fertile agricultural land covering nearly 200 to 250 acres around the proposed unit is expected to bear the brunt of the project if the local and the district administration give nod for the applicants to go ahead with the project, they said. 

Former gram panchayat member Prashanth Kamath said the unit will badly affect the people and the environment in the surrounding three villages --- Kalthuru, Chara and Nalkuru --- as the proposed land for the project is the midpoint for all the three villages. 

He alleged that the applicants have given a fake Google picture while submitting the application.The major impact will be on the forest dwellings in the surroundings and the subsidiary rivulet of river Seethanadi. The river, which is just within one kilometre distance, is the main water source for the dwellers in the area. Besides, Someshwar Wildlife Zone is nearby and the region is the habitation for the wild animals.The dust from stone crusher unit will contaminate water bodies, farm fields and also damage the houses in the nearby surroundings, he expressed concern.

Muddu Poojary, who is in the forefront of the fight against the project, said most of the residents in the region belong to SC/ST communities. More than 150 families will be affected if the unit is established. The walls of their houses will develop cracks if boulders are blasted. The dust will create health hazards like breathing problems. When a stone crusher unit was functioning at Chara, people suffered a lot before it was forcibly shut down. The boulders are also the habitats for wild pigs and leopards which are often seen in the area. There is also a thick forest, he added.

Jyothi Shetty, a villager, said the villagers are dependent on agriculture since ages. “My house is very near, literally on the boulders, which is on the sketch of the proposed project. Imagine the extent of damage if the crusher unit starts functioning,” she rued. 

Gopal Naika, another villager, said he grows paddy, coconut and areca nuts and demanded a special gram sabha should be convened to disapprove the proposal. The proceedings should be submitted to the deputy commissioner, he said.

Kamath said the applicants have already taken lease of 1.5 acres of land comprising boulders for the project. They are planning for the crusher zone. It will be hazardous, he felt. 

He said breaking boulders manually does not create any such harm as against the blasting. The dust particles after the blasting will scatter all over and destroy the natural habitats and human dwellings. The ground water level will also be affected badly, he added.

Kamath said nearby schools will not be able to function properly if the unit starts functioning. It will also have an impact on a cashew factory which has provided emplyment to hundreds of villagers. The applicants have provided false details and have also claimed the land as their own. 

But in reality, it belongs to the people of Marati community. The applicants have already cut the trees to show that the area is not under the forest area, he charged. The villagers have decided to step up their protest if the project gets the approval.