The ‘2017 SJIM Symposium’ on ‘How Europe can partner with India in both India’s development and environmental sustainability’ was recently held at St Joseph’s Institute of Management, Primrose Road.

ADVERTISEMENTThe panelists included Francois Gautier, Consul General, France; Andrea Christ, Deputy Consul General, Germany; Dr Venuprasad, IFS, Conservator of Forests; Conny Camenzind, Deputy Consul General, Switzerland and Dominic McAllister, Deputy High Commissioner, UK, as also Dr Caren Rodrigues, Professor, SJIM and Poornima S, a student at SJIM. 

The inspiration for this symposium was ‘Laudato Si’, Pope Francis’ encyclical on the environment, meaning ‘On Care for Our Common Home’, which called for dialogues on how we are shaping the future of our planet. 

The panelists discussed and exchanged relevant ideas on the symposium’s topic. 
Each of the European Consul Generals spoke about their respective countries’ outlook as well as current areas of collaboration between their country and India in areas such as 
pollution, wildlife, farming, green energy and climate change. 

“Bengaluru is very much like London in many aspects. Both the cities are teeming with people and there are several issues that both face. I hope we can help in providing some solutions from our knowledge and perspective,” said Dominic McAllister. 

The Indian Conservator of Forests brought India’s perspective to the panel. “There is always a tough fight between environmental sustainability and economic growth. We need to see that both go together, without opposing each other, for the benefit of everyone,” said Dr Venuprasad.The panelists concurred that environmental sustainability reinforces and does not inhibit economic growth. They also spoke about how sustainability can be a driver of growth and jobs. 

Drawing from each of the five countries, they spoke of ways in which communities can be drawn away from environmentally harmful occupations while retaining their sense of culture and pride.The student audience for the symposium was selected competitively. Students from 13 different Jesuit schools and colleges in the city took part in painting, poetry and essay writing competitions that had environmental sustainability as their theme. 

Over 80 students with the highest quality submissions were invited to be a part of the symposium. Cash prizes for the first, second and third place in each category were announced. The event concluded on a high note with the host SJIM students presenting a beautiful flash choir around Michael Jackson’s song ‘Heal the World’, totally befitting for the occasion.
Vineeth, one of the student coordinators for the event from SJIM, said, “It was a great learning experience to help put everything together for the symposium. I am glad I got the opportunity to be a part of something so meaningful and of great importance to society as a whole.”