Tribal people in the district complain that none of their problems have been solved even though Social Welfare Minister H Anjaneya stayed overnight at Gombegallupodi under Biligiriranganatha (BR) Tiger Reserve to celebrate New Year and also to understand their problems.

ADVERTISEMENT“When the minister stayed in one of our hamlets on the eve of the New Year, he promised us stars, but we are yet to get even title deeds for the lands on which we have managed to build huts,” they said.

Responding to the government’s call to apply for title deeds, 404 families in the region had fulfilled the formality last December. 

Committee

A committee headed by Kollegal Assistant Commissioner verified the applications and decided to issue title deeds to 308 families. The list had been forwarded to the district-level committee. The tribal families have been kept waiting, as the district committee failed to meet since then.

Tribal families residing inside forests, since at least three generations, are entitled for title deeds for their lands and community rights for collection of forest produce. 

Till now, just 1,603 families have received title deeds for their lands, while 30 hamlets have received community rights. 

At least 2,000 families are awaiting title deeds, while 118 hamlets are yearning for community rights. These communities are residing inside BR Tiger Reserve and Cauvery and Malemahadeshwara Wildlife sanctuaries.

The huts of the tribal families are in a dilapidated condition and they had urged the minister to sanction 2,000 houses. The authorities concerned have not even taken steps to repair the huts, the tribals complain.

Rs 10 crore package

C Madegowda, secretary of Jilla Budakattu Girijanara Abhivrudhi Sangha, said, under the Rs 10 crore package announced by the minister recently, the government should take up development works in consultation with tribal leaders.

Meanwhile, Zilla Panchayat Chief Executive Officer K H Narasimhamurthy said, the minister has sanctioned Rs 10 crore for the welfare of the tribals in the district, besides the State government has sanctioned Rs 8.56 crore. “Steps will be taken to drill borewells and install solar-powered pump-sets at 29 hamlets. Solar lights will be provided to 2,000 families. 

The funds will be used to provide basic amenities to the maximum number of tribal people. With the remaining funds, houses will be both constructed and repaired. A decision to this effect will be taken in consultation with the Deputy Commissioner,” he said.