The West Himalayan region of Uttarakhand is not only an eternal beauty but it is also very famous for its immortal quality! The rich vegetation and mix of colours present here is flanked by River Pushpavati and alpine meadows. Such sights will leave you mesmerised. This region, aptly called the ‘Valley of Flowers’, is located in the Chamoli district of Uttarakhand and it is a national park that spreads over 87.50 sq km and is a part of the Nanda Devi Biosphere Reserve. As a result, the Reserve offers the Valley a biodiversity protection in the transition zone between the Great Himalayan and Zanskar ranges. The Valley is protected under the provisions of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, and is considered as one of the UNESCO World Network of Biosphere Reserves since 2004.

Community participation
The Valley of Flowers National Park is naturally well protected due to its remoteness and limited access. The Valley was unexplored until it was discovered and named by Frank S Smythe and his team in 1931. It has not been subjected to anthropogenic pressures since 1983 when the conservation efforts started. The only exception is of some well-regulated community-based ecotourism efforts in some parts of the Valley. “The Valley of Flowers National Park is a showpiece for conservation in Uttarakhand. Regulated, garbage-free ecotourism with the involvement of local people is being promoted here. It is a place to see a valley full of colourful flowers. The Himalayan monal, the state bird of Uttarakhand, can also be seen,” says eminent biologist AJT Johnsingh.

Apart from this, the Valley contains relatively undisturbed natural habitats with rich floral and faunal diversity. The Valley is floristically rich as about 600 species of angiosperms and 30 species of pteridophyte have been recorded here. Some of the globally threatened plant species such as the Himalayan Maple, blue Himalayan poppy, brahma kamal ( the state flower of Uttarakhand) and monkshood are also found here. Intensive harvest of brahma kamal, which is a medicinal plant for urino-genital disorders, has made it an endangered plant type. 

In fact, the diversity of threatened species of medicinal plants recorded in the Valley of Flowers is higher than that has been recorded in other Indian Himalayan protected areas. For South Indians, the brahma kamal is Epiphyllum oxypetalum, a cactus with white flowers while in the North, it is viewed as Saussurea obvallata’s white flowers.

The Valley is home to various animals as well. Some of the large mammals that have been seen include the leopard and Asian black bear in the lower reaches and the bharal, snow leopard, brown bear, Royle’s pika, Siberian weasel (Mustela sibirica) in the upper reaches. Plumbeous water redstart, brown dipper, pink-browed rosefinch and many more colourful birds also inhabit the region.

Conservation efforts 
To protect the Valley, various conservation plans have been put in place. One such method that has been implemented is the regular monitoring that the Uttarakhand State Forest Department undertakes via the limited routes that provide access to the park. The local communities residing in the buffer zones of the Park at Gangharia and nearby villages actively participate in the conservation programmes of the Forest Department. The Valley is strictly reserved for the betterment of the wildlife, and biodiversity and developmental activities like hydro projects are not permitted. The boundaries of the Valley are well marked and circumscribed. 

To enter the trail, which leads to the heart of Valley of Flowers, one has to get past a check post set up by the state government. Here, officials duly check the identity and register the visitor’s name in a registry. Once this is done, they allow the person to enter with a note stating that he or she has to return by evening. No one is allowed to stay inside the Valley at night and since each entrant needs to register again while leaving, they track each group in case if anyone doesn’t arrive in time. Their diligent work has played an important role in maintaining the pristine habitat the way it is. 

Mountaineering and adventure-based activities inside the Park have been banned since 1983 owing to problems like garbage accumulation and environmental degradation. Grazing has also been restricted in the park. All these probably explain why the biodiversity of the area has remained unaffected by natural disasters that the state witnessed in recent years. 

However, the 2013 flash flood had severely damaged the road to the Valley of Flowers. Many pedestrian bridges were swept away. Residents of Pulna and Bhyundar villages, located enroute to the Valley of Flowers, faced the wrath of nature. Fortunately, biodiversity had remained intact. After the flood, the number of visitors to the Park reduced to less than 200 in the following years. As a result, the ecotourism-based local economy dwindled.

However, there is hope that it will be revitalised. The Uttarakhand Forest Department has now opened a trek route near the Valley of Flowers, which remained closed for the last 45 years. This move serves dual purpose. Firstly, it allows nature lovers to explore a virgin trail and secondly, it also provides an alternate route for rescue teams, in case any disaster like  flash floods occurs. But as this new 15-km trek route is dotted with glaciers, gorges and rivers and rich variety of flora and fauna, it becomes important to take more care to protect them. Tourist or pilgrim management, and development activities such as hydropower projects, and infrastructure inside the buffer zone of the Park are the existing and potential threats that need to be addressed.

Since 1993, the status of flora, fauna and their habitats inside the Park are being monitored through scientific expeditions, which are conducted every 10 years. Regular monitoring of the status of wildlife and their habitats is critical. The long-term protection of the Valley of Flowers National Park can be achieved with high levels of protection and low levels of anthropogenic pressures within the area.

When to visit
The flowering season in the Valley is between June and September. Each month, different species bloom, giving different colours to the Valley. The ideal time to visit  the place is from mid-July to mid-August. This is the time when the bloom is at its best. While the tourists enjoy the pristine beauty of nature here, they also learn vital conservation lessons.