Dr Shivaram Karanth Biological Park in Pilikula will now conserve the endangered wild species of fish in the Western Ghats, whereby around 40 endangered species will be bred and conserved. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe centre is the first of its kind, being focused on the conservation of endangered wild fish species.

Inaugurating the Matsyalaya at Pilikula on Sunday, District-Incharge Minister B Ramanath Rai said, “In the days to come, programmes will be chalked out towards the development of Pilikula, under the State Wildlife Board headed by the chief minister. The centre is set up at a cost of Rs one crore grant released by the Department of Fisheries.”

Matsalaya Consultant Dr Ronald D’Souza said, around 70 to 80 fish species in the Western Ghats are endangered The breeding of 20 such fish will be done at the centre. 

Some of the local fish such as Channa (morante), Clarius batractus are facing extinction following the destruction of their habitat due to sand mining and attack by other fish such as African fish. 

“The collection of fish is done during summer and the species are being collected from Agumbe and Shivamogga region. Hence great care should be taken with regard to maintaining the temperature and other environmental factors, for the fish to survive and breed. Ice and pure oxygen will be provided for particular species,” Ronald added.

“The male fish will be injected with harmones and will be let into the breeding box along with the female fish, to breed. Then, the eggs will be kept in separate containers called hatchers and will be taken care of. The eggs will hatch in two days. It takes two months for the young fish to grow. Later, the grown fish are released to their original habitats in Western Ghats, he explained.

Karnataka Carp (Gende meenu), notified as the state fish, Golden chromite, Garra bicornata, Dawkinsia Arulius, Dawkinsia Assimilis, Hypselobarbus Thomassi and Garra Mullya will be a few species to be conserved at the centre.

Meanwhile, Minister Ramanath Rai handed over a cheque of Rs two crore to the Deputy Commissioner A B Ibrahim, towards the first phase of work on Urban Eco Park in Pilikula and said for the first time, the Pollution Control Board has released Rs five crore towards a project. 

Enviornment department officer Puranik said, 10 acres of land in Pilikula has been earmarked for the construction of Urban Eco Park. Separate units for educating general public on solid waste management, waste water treatment plants, solar power, etc will be set up. 

A 12 member expert committee has been formed under the chairmanship of Subodh Kant Sahay. The detailed project report will be ready within a month, he stated.
Five new swan shaped boats, were also inaugurated at the lake on the occasion.