Actor, anchor and dancer Rithvik Dhanjani always had a thirst for adventure. After the successful run of his television show ‘Man vs Job’, Rithvik is now a participant in ‘Khatron Ke Khiladi 8’. The show, according to him, has helped him overcome his fears.

While the actor is awaiting his first film in Bollywood, he is also hosting television shows and starting his own venture. In an interview with Nina C George, Rithvik shares his thoughts on varied things.

Do you see yourself more as an actor or an entertainer? 
I would say both. Entertaining and acting are two different things although they fall into the same category.

What made you come on board ‘Khatron Ke Khiladi 8’? 
There was not much thought put into it. I have done similar tasks in my earlier shows. It is a comfortable space and easily fits into my timeline.

Were you nervous while doing the stunts? 
No, I wasn’t. My personal experiences came in handy during the show. There was no stunt that was impossible for me to do but it was mentally very tricky. I had to strike the perfect balance between mental control and physical balance.

Which of the previous shows helped you during ‘Khatron...’?
I have done another show called ‘Man vs Job’ which allowed me to be in close proximity with wildlife. I worked closely with wild elephants, crocodiles and honey bees. That gave me a lot of confidence.

What helped you overcome your fears? 
There were so many stunts that I performed for the first time. There were rats put on my face and spiders running all over my body. It is my exposure to the wild that helped me.

What gives you the confidence to excel in what you are doing? 
The faith that people around me have in me. My friends and family have so much faith in me that now I take it as a responsibility to match up to their expectations.

Is there an overdose of reality shows these days? 
Reality shows are your weekend content. We are in the digital era where people get everything in their palm. So if you don’t offer them variety in content, then they will switch off immediately. Reality shows serve their own purpose.

Your definition of style... 
I wear anything that I am comfortable in. I always try to find my own comfort zone.

Do you believe in setting trends? 
I’ve always been following my gut feeling.

When you’re not acting...
I play the flute, mouth organ, drums and a bit of keyboard. Music gives me my sanity.ADVERTISEMENT