Hospitality courseADVERTISEMENTGlion Institute of Higher Education has partnered with Grenoble Ecole de Management to offer a dual-degree programme allowing students to obtain an MBA and Master of Science in International Hospitality Business. The last date to apply is May 31. For more information, visit www.bit.ly/2GAvt9g.International scholarshipsThe Faculty of Science at the University of Strathclyde, Glasgow is offering a range of scholarships for international students. The last date to apply is September 17. For more details, email science-enquiries@strath.ac.uk.MSc courseThe University of Sheffield, UK is inviting applications for MSc(Res) Advanced Manufacturing Technologies course starting in September 2018. There is no deadline for applicants. However, for international students it is advisable to apply by July 31, 2018. For more details, visit www.bit.ly/2IlMRfq or email me-pgadmit@sheffield.ac.uk.Arduino workshopVisvesvaraya Industrial & Technological Museum, Bengaluru is organising a hands-on workshop on Arduino for Class 8 to 12 students in April 2018. The first batch will be held between April 16 and 20, while the second batch will be held between April 23 and 27. For more details, www.vismuseum.gov.in.Accounts internshipCaterpillar Incorporation, a manufacturer of construction and mining equipment, is hiring interns for Accounts profile in Bengaluru. Students can apply by April 18. The stipend is Rs 15,000 per month. To apply, visit www.bit.ly/DH-231.Summer coursesEarthworm Education is hosting a number of events and camps for students this summer. These include 'Make a Didgeridoo and Jam with the Masters', 'Handloom Weaving Workshop for Kids', 'Summer Eco-Camping and Farming in the first Organic Farm', 'Know your food and farm in Mandya', 'Explore the Toy Town of India', and 'Wildlife Conservation Summer Camp in Goa'. For more details, visit www.facebook.com/earthwormindia or call 9930407721/ 9902827313.KWHS GYLAKnowledge@Wharton High School (KWHS) invites applications to its upcoming summer programme, KWHS Global Young Leaders Academy (GYLA). The KWHS GYLA will conduct four two-week sessions from June to August. High school students aged 15-18 years are eligible to apply through BrainGain Magazine. For more details, visit www.whr.tn/1teAunW.FECAT scholarshipStudio for Movement Arts and Therapies announces the JJ scholarship programme for deserving candidates for the Foundation course in Expressive & Creative Arts Therapies (FECAT) course for the academic year 2018-2019. The last date to apply is May 15. For more details, visit http://smartmove.co.in.HR internshipDecathlon Sports India, a sporting goods retailer, is hiring interns for Human Resources (HR) profile in Bengaluru. Students can apply by April 23. The stipend is Rs 10,000 to 18,000 per month. To apply, visit www.bit.ly/DH-229.UPESEATUPES, Dehradun will be conducting its Engineering Aptitude Test (UPESEAT) on May 5, 2018 for admissions into various BTech courses. The last date to apply is April 25, 2018. To apply, visit www.upes.ac.in.Music courseThe Global Music Institute (GMI), India's leading music college, is inviting applications for its Summer Certificate Programme (SCP). It will be held from May 29 to July 7, 2018. The course is designed to help students expand their musical knowledge base. The last date to apply is May 14. To register, email admissions@ globalmusicinstitute.in.Research fellowshipsIIIT-Delhi invites applications from students for the Overseas Research Fellowships (ORF). It will be offered to 60 PhD Scholars and will be given by the Sarojini Damodaran Foundation. For more details, visit www.bit.ly/2EyfbZH.PhD scholarshipCardiff University, UK invites applications from PhD applicants for its PhD in Computer Science and Informatics Scholarship. The last date to apply is April 16. For more details, visit www.bit.ly/2F1E2Js.ScholarshipsPearl Academy has announced scholarships for students seeking admission this year. The scholarships will be offered to students in undergraduate courses for Media and Communication and Advertising & Marketing, and postgraduate courses in Media and Communication for the academic year 2018-19. For more details, visit www.pearlacademy.com.AI courseCork Institute of Technology invites applications for MSc in Artificial Intelligence. This full-time programme will start in September 2018. For more information, visit http://cs.cit.ie/ai.PGDHMInternational Institute of Health Management Research, Delhi invites applications for the Postgraduate Diploma in Hospital and Health Management (PGDHM) course. The last date yo apply is June 30. For more details, visit www.bit.ly/2qmvfsb.Inlaks scholarshipsINLAKS Foundation invites applications for Inlaks Scholarships 2018 from graduates and professionals. The last date to apply is April 15. For more details, visit www.bit.ly/2DiAFtM.Young Investigator AwardsYoung Investigator Awards 2018 invites applications from young scientists. The objective of the scholarship 
is to encourage scientists to research in the field of biotechnology. The last date to apply is April 15. For more details, visit www.bit.ly/2H6XbuC.Cities for our Future ChallengeRoyal Institute of Chartered Surveyors, in collaboration with UK National Commission of UNESCO, invites application for Cities for our Future Challenge 2018 from students and professionals in the fields of surveying, design, architecture or engineering. The last date to apply is May 31. For more details, visit www.citiesforourfuture.com.Heritage internshipThe UNESCO C2C, the Wildlife Institute of India, Dehradun is looking for an intern who loves nature, is deft at editing, is a diligent worker and a strict keeper of deadlines. A walk-in interview will be held on April 23 at the UNESCO C2C building in Wildlife Institute of India. For more details, visit www.bit.ly/2Ho9Zuo.