Major decision

Yeh Rishta Kya Kehlata Hai airs on Star Plus on 
August 10 at 9 pm. Watch on to find out where will Akshara celebrate her teej — in Maheshwari’s house or the Singhania house?ADVERTISEMENTThe dream break Watch ‘Project Runway’ on TLC on August 10 at 10.­30 pm. It is all change for this Emmy-nominated series as it returns for its hotly anticipated seventh season. Fashi­on’s fier­cest competition series rel­o­ca­tes from LA to New Yo­rk, delivering an exceptional line-u­p of celebrity guest jud­g­es, including Nicole Ritchie, Jes­sica Alba and country singer Faith Hill.
Under the watchful eye of Heidi Klum, Tim Gun and the established line-up of judges, 16 talented and hungry fashion desi­­gners compete for the opp­ortunity to break into the notoriously exclusive fashion business.

Inside story of our planet Planet Earth’ airs on Discovery Channel on August 10 at 9 pm. The show consists of the epic story of life on Earth. Five years in production, over 2000 days in the field, using 40 cameramen filming across 200 locations, this is the ultimate portrait of our planet. A stunning television experience that combines rare action, unimaginable scale, impossible locations and intimate moments with our planet's best-loved, wildest and most elusive creatures, ‘Planet Earth’ takes you to places you have never seen before, to experience sights and sounds you may never experience again.

Ghosts of the past 

HBO presents ‘Harry Potter And The Prisoner Of Azkaban’ on August 10 at 9 pm. The movie stars Daniel Radcliffe, Rupert Grint and Em­ma Watson. Harry Potter returns for his third year at Hogwarts, and it’s no less ma­g­ical or adventure-filled than before. Harry and his best friends, Hermione Gran­g­er and Ron Weasley, are met with the news that vicious killer, Sirius Black (Oldman), has escaped from the wizards’ prison at Azkaban. 

The rumour is that he is making his way to Hogwarts, and that there is nothing else on his mind but to kill Harry — a mission that Sirius’ mast­er should have accomplished 12 years ago. Harry summons all the magic he can muster not only to protect himself, but also to find out what it is about the past that spurs Siri­us onwards in his deadly mission.

Kings of the wild 

Masters Of The Jungle’ airs on August 10 at 9 pm on Animal Planet. From living with reptiles to cuddling tigers, these guys are more than just wildlife experts. Watch Austin Stevens, Jeff Corwin, Nick Baker, Saba Douglas, Jane Goodall and Nigel Marven as they live every moment of their lives as crusaders of these terrifying but terrific creatures every night at 9 pm. Being bitten by a viper and wrangling worms is not something that puts them off. They defy danger and death to become the true ‘Masters Of The Jungle’.

TV SHOW TIMINGS ARE SUBJECT TO CHANGE