The Kerala government’s request to the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limted (DMRCL) to undertake a survey for the 236- km railway line passing through Nanjangud- Sultan Batheri- Nilambur, has not gone well with the Karnataka’s forest department.

After strongly resisting the earlier move by the Kerala government to allow night traffic in Bandipur National Park, the Karnataka forest department has now said the proposed rail line cutting through the Bandipur Tiger Reserve (BTR) can’t be permitted.

The Kerala government has claimed that the rail line would boost tourism in the region, especially pilgrimage as it will link Wayanad,Nilgiris, Guruvayur and Sabarimala with Mysuru and Bengaluru. But, the Karnataka forest department is in no mood to buy this claim as 10.5 km of prime BTR will be lost to the project. 

Railway Minister Suresh Prabhu in the last railway budget had listed the 236- km railway line. The Kerala government has now placed it on priority list to implement it under joint venture with railways. Concerned over this, the Karnataka Forest department is leaving no stone unturned to ensure that the project is dropped.  An official from BTR said that so far no survey has been permitted in the forest patch. A month ago, railway officials had visited the place. 

 Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) B J Hosmath said that during their last meeting with the officials of Ministry of Environment and Forest in Delhi in May, Karnataka had made it clear that the project will not be permitted. “No formal communication has reached us either from the railways or the Kerala government,” he said. 

Environmentalists too are against the project. Praveen Bhargav, Trustee Wildlife First said: “Rail connectivity between north Kerala to Mangaluru, Mysuru and to Bangaluru has already been established by fragmenting pristine forests in the Western Ghats. This line is completely under-utilized and all that is required is more fast trains on this section. Therefore, the demand for yet another rail link through Bandipur which has some of the highest densities of both tigers and elephants must be rejected. The railway minister, who headed the environment ministry in the past, is sensitive to the interests of wildlife and must nip this proposal in the bud”.