The accused: theodore boone
ADVERTISEMENTJohn Grisham
Hachette, 2012, pp 288, 250
Thirteen-year-old Theodore Boone knows more about the law than most lawyers. When stolen computer equipment turns up in Theo’s school locker, the police start leaning on him hard. He is the only suspect. What if he is found guilty? Theo must find the real felon and reveal the true motivation behind the crimes of which he stands accused.

The soul of the rhino
Hemanta Mishra with Jim Ottaway Jr
Penguin, 2012, pp 234, 299
Ugly yet enchanting, terrifying yet delicate, the Indian rhinoceros is a magnificent animal. It is also in danger of being killed off for good. This book is a spirited account of one man’s journey to protect the animal in the foothills of the Himalayas. It delves into the labyrinths of South Asian wildlife conservation and one man’s endurance in the face of it all.

Seven days to somewhere
C K Meena
Dronequill, 2012, pp 207, 275
Super-achiever Nischit, centre of his parents’ universe, tastes failure for the first time in his life. He chalks out Plan A. The countdown begins...but the rowdy, repressible parakeet Po barges into his life and tells him stories of people from another world. Nischit is poised to escape when the unexpected happens. Is there room for Plan B?
 
The devotion of suspect X
Keigo Higashino
Hachette, 2011, pp 374 350
Yasuko lives a quiet life, a good mother to her only child. When her ex-husband appears at her door without warning, her world is shattered. When Detective Kusanagi of the Tokyo Police tries to piece together the events of that night, he finds himself confronted by puzzling, mysterious circumstances. Nothing quite makes sense...

My life
Brett Lee with James Knight
Random House, 2012, pp 436, 499
This is Brett Lee’s story. The book takes you inside the dressing room and sheds light on the high and lows of cricket, the pride of possessing a baggy green, the camaraderie between the boys, superstardom, and the controversies. It provides a glimpse into the life of one of Australia’s most successful fast bowlers and his love for music, fashion and above all, India.

Churning the earth: the making of global India
Aseem Shrivastava and Ashish Kothari
Penguin, 2012, pp 394, 699
The authors present evidence on how the nature of India’s recent growth has been predatory and question its sustainability. Unfettered development has damaged the ecological basis that makes life possible, resulting in conflicts and an increased chasm between the rich and poor, threatening the future of India as a civilisation.

The hunger games
Suzanne Collins
Scholastic, 2008, pp 374, 295
Panem’s harsh and cruel Capitol forces its citizens to send one boy and one girl, between the ages 12 and 18, to participate in the annual Hunger Games, a fight to the death on live TV. Katniss Everdeen regards it as a death sentence when she steps forward to take her sister’s place in the games. If she is to win, she will have to make choices that outweigh survival against humanity and life against love.