Rare photographs illustrating the rich history of Nepal are on display in the City, providing a quick view into the Himalayan nation’s traditional, cultural and political scenario over the last century.

ADVERTISEMENT‘Historical images from Nepal’ is a collection of photographs clicked by three generations belonging to the renowned family of painters from Nepal – Dirgha Man Chitrakar, his son Ganesh Man Chitrakar and grandson Kiran Man Chitrakar. On display at Russian Centre of Science and Culture till May 10, the photographs bring a view from royal court of Nepal, diplomatic ties between India, Russia and Nepal, hunting as practiced in the country where majority of population practices Hinduism, and shrinking landscapes to accommodate modern and urban settings.  

The exhibition largely co­n­­tains photographs clicked by Dirgha Man. A recogni­s­ed painter and lensman of Nepal, Dirgha Man was the first official photographer to accompany then Prime Minister of Nepal Chandra Shumsher Rana on his visit to England in 1908.

A set of pictures depict a ‘then and now’ contrast through shots of the same places by Dirgha Man and his grandson Kiran Man in their times. Tundikhel in Kathmandu, once the biggest ground in Asia as clicked by Dirgha Man in 1910, now has residential colonies as clicked by Kiran Man in 2008.

The collection also has some rare pictures from the royal court of Nepal. One that catches the eye is a photograph of Chandra Shumsher Rana’s granddaughter on her wedding. The caption alongside the picture mentions that the young bride was wearing jewellery worth more than four million rupees!

Hunting of wildlife animals has been one of the most favoured sports of the Rana rulers in Nepal and so, a set of pictures narrate a tale of the biggest hunt in history in 1935. 

The hunting expeditions used to last for three to four months, involving as many as 200 helpers in the plains of Terai forests. In one such photograph taken in circa 1935, PM Juddha Shumsher is seen posing with the skin of 300 animals and reptiles after the hunt!
Nepal is known world over for its numerous beautiful Hindu temples which attract international tourists the year round. The temples and their popularity have remained unaffected despite the infrastructural and societal changes. 

A photograph by Kiran Man in which three women are seen sporting three different attires - a sari, a short dress and a traditional Nepali dress just about sums up the idea of a revolutionised Nepal which believes in keeping its traditions intact.