Dear Sir,
ADVERTISEMENTI am currently studying in class XII(CBSE) with PCMC subjects. Recently, I have realised that I have no interest in pursuing science in the future. My interest lies more in mass communications as I want to do something creative.

 As both the mass communication and science subjects are vastly different, I am doubtful about scoring well in wither. Is it possible to score well in both? Can you suggest some books that can help me with the entrance exams? 
Swathi

Dear Swathi,
I am very happy that you are making the efforts to identify the career most suited for you. At this juncture, you can select anything that you wish except medicine and life sciences, since you have not taken biology. Don’t worry about the two years of your efforts in science going waste as it has sharpened your analytical and logical abilities.

 If mass communications is what you want to pursue, then put in dedicated efforts even if it means scoring less in the boards. It is totally worth it. If you don’t make it to the top institutes, settle for the next best ones. With a three year degree in mass communication and two other subjects from a fairly good college, you can aim for post-graduation in mass communication from one of the best institutes in India if you start preparing early. That will give you the necessary qualifications to do well in this field.

Dear Sir,
I am currently in my final year of BSc. My subjects are chemistry, zoology, and biochemistry. My overall percentage is above 60 percent as of now. I want to take up a job soon after completion of my course. But I am also interested in higher studies specially in the field of zoology and wildlife. Kindly, suggest me some methods where I could earn and pursue my higher studies simultaneously.
A student

Dear student,
While it is good to read about your intentions to start earning early and your interest in a fascinating field like zoology and wildlife, it is also a fact that BSc doesn’t give you sufficient skills to be employable in any responsible position at a practical level. Since the field does not offer wide employment in India, you may have to struggle, but if your determination and passion is strong, you will eventually do  well. 

You can either take up an entry-level job at whatever salary is offered in any wildlife organisation and then slowly build up your skills and position, or be patient till you acquire a specialised post-graduation degree from a good institute before you take the plunge.

Dear Sir,
I pursued commerce after my 10th grade and I am a BBM graduate. While hunting for jobs, I came across only BPO ones which I don’t enjoy. My interest lies in human resources and for this, I have applied for a PGD(HRM) course through Symbiosis distance learning programme. Is it the right move? Kindly advise me on the same.
Sachin Paul

Dear Sachin,
While it is good that you have identified your specific area of interest, and have also taken up a distance learning course in it, be aware that you will only get the basic theoretical knowledge through the course you are doing. You will have to supplement it with practical knowledge that enhances your market value in the field of HR. 

You can either leave your BPO job and look for any job in the HR department of even a medium-sized or start-up organisation, or take the plunge by becoming a full-time student doing either an MBA or a PG diploma in HR. You may have to be patient till you get your first breakthrough but in the long run, you will have a better job 
satisfaction and will also rise quickly on the employment ladder.

Dear Sir,
I am currently in my third year of mechanical engineering. I came to know about the University Entry Scheme (UES) under which students pursuing BE/BTech can apply for a position in the Indian Navy when they are going to the fourth year of engineering.

 I am very much interested in the same, and I am eligible to apply in July 2015. I have heard that the selection process is very stringent that includes physical as well as aptitude tests. Kindly enlighten me on the details of the selection procedures and tests. 
Vikram

Dear Vikram,
The University Entry Scheme, offered not only by the Navy, but also by the Indian Army and the Indian Air Force, is a good way of ensuring your employment even before you have completed your degree. Unlike private organisations, the military gives you an assured job, and you have the choice of Short Service Commission (SSC) or Permanent Commission. Salaries in military service have improved significantly in the recent past, and with the perks, retirement and other benefits, it is highly rewarding. This is besides the joy and honour of serving your country. 

Since the rules change periodically, it is better to keep checking the official website of Indian Navy (www.nausena-bharti.nic.in) for the latest updates. You can also get in touch with a few professionals in Bangalore who train students for various military entrance exams, including Apex Institute (9886401567), Wg Co Athri (apkendra@rediffmail.com), Cavalier India (www.cavalierindia.com), Military Selection (36764887) and Wow Adventures (www.wow-adventures.com).

Dear Sir,
I completed my BCom with 82 percent from Bangalore University last year. I have been working in a private company for last five months as an Operations Accountant. I wish to pursue my higher studies in literature. Will taking up literature courses help my career right now? 
Ravikant Mishra

Dear Ravikant,
As you are aware, literature courses will take you away from your field of accounts and finance. If you are very keen on moving into a completely new field, and if you have the talent (which can be checked out by any good English Literature professor), then you are eligible to take up a Masters in English. You can do it through distance education while you are working, as it is offered by most universities all over the country. 

 If you wish to go deep into the subject, it will be better if you seek admission in a prestigious university like Central University of English and Foreign Languages, Hyderabad (www.efluniversity.ac.in), JNU or Ambedkar University, Delhi (www.aud.ac.in), which will ensure a good future in writing, research, teaching, documentation and other related fields.

Dear Sir,
My son has a diploma in mechatronics and is currently in the final year of engineering. He is an average student and wants to study further. He is confused between MTech degree and MBA. But our income sources are few and we are worried about his future. Kindly guide us.
Madhuri L Balekundri

Dear Madhuri,
If after doing diploma and having come to final year of BE, he is unable to decide about which field he would like to take up, a good move would be to take up an entry level job in a medium-sized industry related to his field. Within a year, he will gain enough experience as to decide between hardcore technology and management course. 

Accordingly, he can choose the right option for his higher studies. Good work experience also helps in getting admission in a reputed institution for master degrees.