At a time when the governments have been taking several measures to attract more and more tourists in view of generating jobs and to give a boost to the economy, a threat of stagnation looms large over the sector.ADVERTISEMENTExperts say that since decades, the authorities concerned in the tourism sector have been marketing the same Mysuru Palace, Sri Chamarajendra Zoological Gardens (Mysuru Zoo), Chamundi Hill and Brindavan Gardens in the same fashion. Tourism has not been taken to the next level. No measures have been taken to attract quality tourists. No steps are taken to educate the tourists. The only aim of the tourism departments seems to be just popularising and marketing the destinations. Most of the tourists tread only the popular tourist circuit. Mysuru attracts less number of explorers who add value to tourism.Experts also say that apart from promoting tourism, the onus is on the authorities concerned to educate tourists about the etiquette to be followed in view of conserving the historical monuments and nature for future generations.N K A Ballal, retired vice-president of ITDC, said, “Mysuru, being a cultural and heritage hub, has not evolved over the years. The tourist destinations have neither been improved nor have been maintained well. While international destinations like Singapore and Dubai are adding newer attractions over the years, Mysuru does not have anything new to offer. Dasara festival, which was a dream for every tourist, has now been reduced to a state affair. The number of tourists visiting India as a whole has increased but the same cannot be said for Mysuru. This is mainly because of poor accessibility and sub-standard accommodation facilities.”“Mysuru is gifted as it has everything a tourist desires, from royal heritage, culture, history, wildlife, UNESCO sites, trekking and waterfalls. Of late, Mysuru has become famous for yoga institutions. Many foreigners visit Mysuru to furthering their skills in yoga. But so far, no measures have been taken to improve the facilities. The contribution of the government agencies to either popularise or to propagate yoga is negligible. Mysuru needs reinvention, infrastructure development and better airport facilities. The palaces, which depict royalty, are in a pathetic condition. If accessibility is improved, medical tourism can also be developed,” he said.“Huge funds are required for infrastructure, which needs planning and a good project report. After bringing about comprehensive changes, tourism can be marketed with the help of ambassadors or with the involvement of the erstwhile royal family members. When it comes to preservation and conservation, people lack public hygiene. They are not bothered about cleanliness. They dump garbage everywhere, throw plastic bottles and pollute natural resources,” Ballal added.Harish, a travel agent, said, “There are many ecological spots around Mysuru, which can be developed and promoted. Priority should be given to conservation of natural resources. Also, the safety of the tourists should be considered”.Praveen, a resident of Mysuru, said, “Mysuru has everything to attract tourists. It is a beautiful place and has all the necessary facilities for tourists. We get a good number of visitors every year. The only thing we lack is marketing.” Ram Shankar, a tourist, said, “Mysuru does not have newer tourist attractions. I personally did not like this place. It ends at the palace, zoo and Chamundi Hill. The museums are not well maintained. The royalty is not projected well. Mysuru gets boring after a day.”D Rakshitha and
Gowri Harish