A night time stroll down a commercialised road in Bengaluru is akin to walking into a happening disco. Lights of all possible shapes and hues twinkle and sparkle from shop fronts and hoardings and create an ethereal effect which, though quite pretty, is one of the major factors behind the phenomenon called light pollution now.

“Similar to carbon footprint, we have something called as light footprint now. And the unnecessary lighting in and around buildings is one of the major contributing factors to this,” says Ashwathy Subramanyan, a student. “While shops and malls employ a lot of illumination to attract customers, they use up quite a lot of electricity, even after the shutters are downed, with their brightly lit shop displays and store signboards. We squander a lot of electricity in keeping things lit up at night while most of us sleep,” she rues.

Mangapathi Rao, a law student, agrees about the energy costs of such a needless 
extravaganza and points out that apart from the financial implications involved, there are other considerations. “It creates glare hazards on roads and also blocks our view of the night sky and stars. When these lights shine into homes and apartments, the sleep-wake patterns of people are also affected. I understand the business considerations and the need to attract customers but there should be some provision to turn off these lights once shops are closed,” he says.

Apart from the shops, the larger-than-life hoardings with their rows of neatly stacked and overly bright bulbs are another factor that, according to studies, have been making our night skies brighter and stars invisible. Apart from this, other common offenders are restaurants, cars and even stadiums with their floodlights. 

Other than the sheer annoyance of constantly having your eyes blinded, a lesser known impact is that on the patterns of nocturnal wildlife. A correlation has been established between light pollution and the lessening population of sparrows, moths, spiders and other species. 

Talking about the remedial steps that can be adopted, Gouri Varma, a student, says, “Lighting that emits too much light or shines when and where it’s not needed is wasteful. We desperately require some sort of an environmental responsibility to prepare for the greater energy needs ahead. Outdoor lighting should be timebound and should be switched off once business is closed. If it is imperative, like in case of certain billboards etc, it should be fully shielded and should direct the light down, not into the sky.” She goes on to add, “Even when outdoor lights are being used, these should be quality ones. These can help cut down on energy use and carbon emissions.”

Maybe it is time to say, ‘Let there be less light’.