Deputy Commissioner Dr N Shivashankar has directed the officials to provide basic facilities like drinking water, toilets and others at Rajaseat, Honnammanakere, Abbey falls, Mallahalli falls, Irpu galls, Makkala Gudibetta and Nalkunaadu palace. 
ADVERTISEMENT Speaking at a meeting on the development of the tourist spots here, he said a meeting will be convened under the presidentship of Regional Commissioner, to discuss on the integrated development of Rajaseat.  He directed the PWD officials to complete the work on Kodava Heritage centre building. The tourism department officials should make an effort to get the funds released. He said the officials should look into the work on developing road leading to Dubare, Chiklihole and Kanive Ramalingeshwara temple.  Rajaseat Development Committee member Monthi Ganesh said that tourist spots like Nehru Mantapa, Railway watch tower, rifle shooting centres should be developed.Kodagu Wildlife Committee’s Muthanna said there is a need to maintain cleanliness in and around tourist spots. The DC said that the public toilets constructed in the Fort premises should be open for public use. The CMC should supply water to the toilet. Nehru Mantapa should also be developed.  Illegal homestay
 Homestay Association President Karumbaiah said as many as 252 homestays in Kodagu district are registered. There are over 2,500 homestays functioning in the district. Deputy Commissioner Dr N Shivashankar should initiate measures to contain the mushrooming of illegal homestays in the district. The Deputy Commissioner in turn directed Tourism department deputy director Shivalingappa to collect complete details on homestays in the district.  The CMC Assistant Executive Engineer said that the CMC has initiated measures to check illegal homestays in the district. Only 36 homestays in the CMC limits are registered. PED executive engineer Dodda Siddaiah, Zilla Panchayat Executive engineer Manjunath, RTO Mohammed Habeebulla Khan, and others were present.