Dear Sir

I am a BSc graduate with biotechnology, chemistry and zoology as my major streams. After graduating, I have lost my way. I have been hearing a lot that there is no scope for Biotechnology in India and I am not very interested in chemistry. 

ADVERTISEMENTMy interest lies in zoology but an MSc in Zoology will just land me in the teaching profession which I do not want to do. Also, at times, I feel like changing my field and exploring other areas too. Please suggest some different options which I can pursue.

AS

Dear AS,

Glad to see that you have moved into a different and challenging field, and that you have an interest in zoology.  There are plenty of opportunities beyond teaching in the area of your passion, which are practical and rewarding. 

With greater awareness of environment, ecology, wildlife preservation and corporate social responsibility, you will find good prospects. Explore postgraduate courses offered by Wildlife Institute of India, Dehradun, (www.wii.gov.in), Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi  (www.jnu.ac.in), Indian Institute of Ecology & Environment (www.ecology.edu), Salim Ali School of Ecology & Environment, Pondicherry, Indian Institute of Forest Management, Bhopal, (www.iifm.ac.in), Indian Institute of Human Settlements, Bangalore (www.iihs.co.in) and Bhoomi College Bengaluru (www.bhoomicollege.org). 

In the meanwhile, spend time as a volunteer with NGOs that work with animals of different kinds, and you will get a wide exposure and more information about what is happening in the practical world of zoology.

Dear Sir,

I am currently pursuing a degree in BCA, but my interest lies in animal welfare. I am into my third year in this stream and I am not getting anywhere. My marks are not that pleasant. 

Due to peer pressure, I ended up studying something that I do not like. I have gathered a lot of information on institutes providing wildlife courses but I need to have a degree pertaining to biology to be eligible. I don’t know what to do and I’m really confused. 
Can you please suggest a few colleges where I can do a wildlife course with any degree?  I want to do my bit for wildlife and the environment. Please help me. Thank you.

Namratha

Dear Namratha,

As you have mentioned, getting into a wildlife PG course will not be possible with a BCA degree, but if you are willing to expand beyond into areas related to human-animal interface, some of the courses offered in the list given in response to the above question will be open to you.  

Alternatively you can consider doing a Masters in Social Work (MSW) and then seek employment in an organisation working in the field of animal welfare.  Thirdly, if you have good writing skills, you can do your postgraduation in mass communication and take up a career writing for the welfare of animals, ecology, nature conservation etc.

Dear Sir, 

I have completed my BCA last month with an aggregation of 59%. I have been placed in a software company. I am thinking to go for MCA. I need to spend a huge amount to complete it as it is a three year course from VTU. 

I wanted to know if it is better to pursue MCA in a prestigious college or to go for the job now and pursue my postgraduation part time? I am totally confused in this matter.  

Sateesh

Dear Sateesh,

It is good that you wish to upgrade your qualifications since only having a BCA degree will limit your promotions in future. Masters in Computer Application (MCA) is a fairly rigorous course involving extensive practical work and the best option would be to take it up as a full time course. 

Look for government or aided colleges, or try for a scholarship.  Only if that is not possible, then you can either take up part-time course, or work hard for a year or two, save sufficient funds and then go back to full time studies. 

Alternatively you can take up short-term courses related to various computer applications, and that will enhance your skills as well as your employability. Once you have proven yourself as a domain specialist, you can even do MBA through Open University without giving up your job. Open University courses are much cheaper than classroom courses.

Dear Sir,

I am an engineering graduate from the electronics and telecommunications branch. I wish to pursue MTech. Please suggest good branches in MTech which have more scope in IT industry. 

Among VLSI design, Digital electronics, Digital communication, Nanotechnology, Computer networks which is best to opt for. I have a good academic score i.e. 80% throughout engineering. Also suggest some good institutions.

JJ

Dear JJ,

As a high scoring student, by now you should have been able to determine which aress of electronics or telecommunication your interest and passion lies in.  Also keep in mind that there are good career opportunities beyond the IT industry and you should explore all alternatives. All the branches you have mentioned above have good ‘scope’ but your success will depend on your own aptitude, inclination and interest. 

If you are still unable to decide, then take up a job so that you get exposure to the practical world of work, and can evaluate which area you will enjoy and be good at.  Taking off for a year will also give you opportunity to prepare well for GATE exam which is held in Jan/Feb and with good ranking it will enable you to get into the most reputed institutions like IITs, NITs, IISc etc.  See website http://gate.iitk.ac.in/ for more details.