Wildlife rescuers and volunteers across the City seemed to be tied down due to the severe shortage of funds. 

ADVERTISEMENTVolunteers claim that the honorary payment due from the Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) for their services has not been paid for over a year and a half now. 

However, the severe crunch in funds has not deterred the spirits of these animal lovers, who have rescued over 300 animals a month. Unable to fund the rescue themselves, they seek money from those who call them for help. Their services cost anywhere between Rs 500 and Rs 800. 

Rohan (name changed), a volunteer, has got bitten by a snake three times in a row during rescue operations. “I spent close to Rs two lakh from my own pocket. None of the NGOs nor the BBMP where I work as a volunteer came to my support,” he said. 
Rohan is just one among the many wildlife rescue volunteers who is awaiting help. “Most of us work as we are passionate about the job. Some of us work part-time while a few of us devote over six hours a day for the same,” he added. 

Another volunteer, Kumar, said that each volunteer gets no less than six calls a day and spend not less than Rs 800 per case.“We have two options. Either to take the injured animal to Bannerghatta or to Kengeri. However, we choose Bannerghatta as the animals recover faster there. For this, we will also shell out on fuel,” he said. Kumar, who works as a volunteer part-time, added that he would not only lose work hours each time trying to do the rescue work but also get paid nothing.  Volunteers get plenty of calls to rescue injured Kites during the summer. 

Besides travel expenses, they also shell out quite a lot on equipments to rescue injured birds. “We will need rope climbing equipment to rescue birds that are on high rise buildings or trees. The equipment when procured on a rental basis costs over Rs 700,” Kumar explained. 

Sharath Babu, one of the volunteers associated with the BBMP, said that he has not received honorary payment since April 1, 2014. “All volunteers put together, we are to be paid about Rs 50,000 a month,” he added.  

Sources in the BBMP confirmed that the payment was overdue but BBMP Commissioner M Lakshminarayana said that the issue had not been brought to his notice. “If they have any issue, they can approach us and it will be resolved. They are paid on an honorary basis for the services they render,” he added.