MP Shobha Karandlaje has said that Kemmannugundi has not been getting tourists due to negligence of the state government. 

ADVERTISEMENTA protest will be staged  under the leadership of former CM B S Yeddyurappa, after the winter session of the Parliament. 

Speaking to mediapersons in Chikkamagaluru on Saturday, she said that as a CM, Yeddyurappa had released funds to take up development work in  Kemmannugundi. However, after the completion of the work, the tourist spot is not open for  public. 

Killer tiger

The killer tiger that was caught in Pandaravalli has been left in Khanapura forest. The residents in the area have been protesting  against the move of the forest department.  
The forest department should release such tigers in sanctuaries like Nagaralhole, she suggested.  Spotting of tigers have created panic among people in the district. The number of tigers have increased in Bhadra forest and they are entering residential areas owing to various reasons. Preventive measures should be taken in this regard. 

Flayed

Shobha Karandlaje strongly condemned the act of Home Minister's son and wildlife board member Rana George who took part in the operation to capture killer tiger at Pandavaralli.

She said “the forest department staff  had expertise in capturing the tiger. What was the need for him to take part in the operation.”

‘Oppose kiss of love’

Karandlaje appealed to the parents to stop their children from taking part in ‘kiss of love’ campaign. The campaign is against Indian culture.

“This is the land of Gandhi, who showed the path of non-violence to the world. No one will oppose democratic movements. 

But, what was the prominence in holding an event like kiss of love? 

There is nothing in the campaign for the parents to feel good about it, she said. 
It is improper to carry out protest by targeting a particular organisation. 

“I have already appealed to the police and state government not to give permission for the same,” she said. 

She also urged to arrest the accused in Nandita's case.