A group of villagers barged into the Maddur range of the Bandipur Tiger Reserve early last week and cut down bamboo trees to organise a fair in the restricted area. They also scared away animals which came to drink from a waterhole, it has been revealed.

ADVERTISEMENTThe incident occurred on the fringes of the forest in front of an anti-poaching camp (where guards and watchers are stationed 24x7) at Alegowdana Katte in Maddur range.

About 100 people not only felled fully grown, green bamboo trees in blatant violation of the Wildlife Act, but also made 
frequent trips to ferry the plunder.

The Forest Department has restricted even researchers from conducting studies within the “inviolate” national parks and tiger reserves. But the locals said they felled bamboo trees to organise a mela and appease gods.

Though department insiders said the villagers forcefully entered the forests, a few others said the residents had the permission of the deputy conservator of forests (DCF) to axe trees. 

“They are all residents of Hongavalli near Gundlupet. The DCF has permitted them to cut bamboos required for the jatre (fair),” said a source.

The villagers had brought a tractor into the forest to transport bamboos to the village. More shocking is the fact that the incident has occurred when the forest fires have left a trail of destruction in the three tigers reserves of Bandipur, Nagarahole and BRT Wildlife Sanctuary, which form a contiguous forest.

This part of the forest patch, where most of it is still green, has been vulnerable to such attacks earlier too, because whenever a mela is organised within this tiger reserve, it is denuded of bamboo and wood.

Human intrusion

Villagers had plundered the forest during the fair of Himavat Gopalaswamy Hills earlier. 
They had also scared away a herd of elephants which had come to drink water. This is a crucial habitat for the wildlife and animals like elephants, gaurs, sambar, mount jack and mouse deer are sighted here.

According to local residents, Alegowdana Katte being a crucial tiger habitat, the movement of big cats is recorded almost daily.

Bandipur forest is a core/critical habitat to be managed as an inviolate area under 38 (V) of the Wildlife Protection Act. 

According to experts, the Supreme Court directions dated February 14, 2000, in the Godavaraman Thirumalpad versus Union of India case, have banned removal of all dead and dying trees, including grass, from the forest. 

“Even if permission is granted to remove bamboo, this is a direct violation of Section 35 (6) of the Wildlife Protection Act, which clearly states there shall be no destruction of habitat unless such destruction benefits wildlife,” said a wildlife expert.

Most disturbed region

However, Bandipur has been the most disturbed region with several fairs being organised annually, where thousands of people participate. A fair of Himavat Gopalaswamy was held on March 18, 2012. Earlier, three fairs were held there. A dargah at Gundre witnessed participation of about 500 people, while the department had permitted only 12 to enter the forests.

On February 20, 2012, Bandipura Tavarekatte Madappa Jatre drew at least 5,000 people. 

The Beladakuppe Mahadeshwara fair saw the participation of nearly one lakh people in October last year.

Principal Chief Conservator of Forests and Chief Wildlife Warden B K Singh told Deccan Herald that the bamboo-felling incident had not come to his notice. He said he would look into the matter and act against the culprits and officials responsible for it.