Wild elephants menace haunts villagers at Nelaji near Napoklu for the last few days. The wild elephants which are camping at Nelaji, Anetti, Peroor and Kunjila are engaged in damaging the crops.

ADVERTISEMENT The villagers have been spending sleepless night. 

The wild elephants had damaged banana grown in more than two and half acre in the region, incurring a huge loss to one Appu Maniyanda Raghu Subbaiah. 

The villagers feel that the forest department officials are neglecting the woes of the villagers. Herd of five to six elephants have been spotted in the village few days ago. 

They said the elephants were attracted by Banana, arecanut which were being cultivated in the region. 

Inspite of the villagers incurring huge loss, only an official from the forest department had visited the spot. 

However, the officials have not taken any measure to chase the elephants back to the forest. 

The Nelaji villagers have to walk to reach the main road. Now, with the elephants camping in the region, the school children are finding it difficult to walk to the school. Even the labourers are not ready to work in the estates, fearing for life. 

The villagers said “non availability of food and water inside the forest force the elephants to enter villages in search of food and water. The forest department has not taken any measure to check elephant-humanbeing conflict in the district. 

In the name of protecting forest and wildlife, the government has declared forests as sanctuary. However, no efforts have been made to provide security to the lives of those who have been residing in the periphery of the forest.” 

The villagers have spotted the herd of elephants while plucking mushroom inside the forest, on Tuesday. 

Speaking to Deccan Herald, coffee grower Appu Maniyanda Raghu Subbaiah said “we have incurred huge loss following the wild elephant attack. 

The officials have not visited the spot. If the forest department officials fail to chase the wild elephants within three days, then we will gherao the forest department office.” 

Nelaji Farmers and Development Recreation Association President Maleyanda A Ayyappa said “we have incurred huge loss following the wild elephant menace. The department is not providing suitable compensation for the loss of crops.”