They made best use of the occasion at the multi-lingual poets meet organised by the Madikeri Dasara janotsava Bahubhasha Kavighoshti Committee and Karnataka Kodava Sahithya Academy at Kaveri Kalakshethra on Sunday.

There were descriptions of Kodagu’s land, water, agriculture, tradition, culture and heroic deeds along with the beauty of the nature and wildlife. There were disappointment over the failure of government in responding to the problems of the district. There were displeasure over Kodavas not getting the rights over Baane land. There were concern over threat to sanctity of Talacauvery along with the wild elephant menace. This was how a senior poet Chendrimada Ga Muthappa explained Kodagu through his poem. 
 Muthappa recited poem on ‘Jamma bane’ and highlighted the problems faced by people in Kodagu. 

The limericks by an invited poet of Somwarpet, Ha Thi Jayaprakash on politicians Shobha Karandlaje, Siddaramaiah, Goolihatti Shekar, Aravinda Limbavalli, Janardhan Reddy and B S Yeddyurappa highlighted the present political situation in the state. As many as 38 poets recited poems on the occasion. This included four in English and one in Hindi. 

Recitation of poems by little V J Monish of Madikeri and Ananya Sharma of Gonikoppa were the centre of attraction. B R Joyappa recited poem ‘Kalajnani,’ B Siddaraju Bellyya— ‘IT BT gala benneri,’ Kayapanda B Tata Changappa— ‘Madikeri,’ T L Padmaja—‘Shikshaka,’ Sathish Kumar of Cherambane—‘Naanu bareyuthene,’ Hemalatha Poornaprakash— ‘Nirlipta baduku,’ Sunitha Lokesh— ‘Pranaya male,’ Shanthaleela— ‘Dr Raj ge namana,’ Manju Gopinathan — ‘Kaarana ishte,’ M E Mohammed—‘Bedagina Kodagu,’ M K Ashraf — ‘Guruve Namaha,’ and Asha Dharmapal recited ‘Prabhu Kaneyagiddare’. 

K P Devidas of Gonikoppa recited Malayalam poem ‘Yakshi paramb,’ Narayana of Neerabidire recited Tulu poem ‘Ippodu Incha,’ B M Vasu Rai—’Bale Dasarogu’, Sabalam Bojanna Reddy recited Telugu poem ‘Nenu Manishi Kada.’ A V Manjunath of Virajpet recited limericks. The English poems recited included— M S Subbaiah’s  ‘The power of the invisible,’ Kiggalu G Harish’s ‘We surely will succeed,’ Thekkada Gulabi Janardhan’s ‘Ever green teacher,’ and  V J Monish’s ‘Flower.’ M E Manoj recited Hindi poem.ADVERTISEMENT