People keen on trout fishing or even simple angling never tire of telling fabulous tales about the awesome catch that got away. One listens to such tales in mock awe, discounting the size of the catch by at least half. But in my tale it is not the fish that got away. It was my wife and I who virtually got away from the jaws of a Great White Shark in the beautiful Mossels Bay in South Africa from where we have just returned after a thrilling tour.

The Great White Shark experience is an added attraction over and above the normal activities like sunset cruises, scuba diving, surfing etc along the beautiful beaches of Mossels Bay. Besides the Big Five of African wildlife – the African lion, elephant, Cape buffalo, leopard and rhinoceros – South Africa also nurtures marine life like the  mighty whales and sharks and their playful cousins, the seals and dolphins. 

We had heard of the graceful beauty and the powerful predatory behaviour of the Great White Shark. We knew that watching the giant approach us with huge jaws wide open and large inward leaning teeth shining in the transparent blue waters would be a chilling experience. It involved going down in a steel cage suspended in the cold watery depths from a motorised large boat. 
Dressed up in rubber suits  and transparent goggles and snorkels to view the giant fish from below the water surface, we could also keep our necks just above the water by standing on a steel bar a couple of feet above the floor of the three-metre deep cage. The three by two metre cage made of solid steel bars was strong enough to face a mighty collision from the shark. We only had to keep our taut nerves relaxed and our nervous limbs away from the cage-bars lest they  be nibbled by the giants. 

The boat crew threw large baits of freshly chopped fish-heads hooked on to a rope. Soon, the giant sharks hunting for the dodgy seals in the vicinity got attracted by the seemingly easy prey of the bait. However, as they approached with their mighty jaws wide open, the bait was pulled close to our cage. 

Annoyed by the fleeting prey, the great sharks charged with full fury. They came within an arm’s length of our cage and then banked swiftly to left or right to avoid a collision. Every time they lunged forward, we missed a heartbeat. We remained submerged for half an hour and watched with bated breath the huge jaws chasing the baits.

After emerging safely on the ship’s deck, the disturbing thought on my mind was – what if a charging giant broke the grill and got entangled in the cage? The organisers laughed it off as it had never happened before. But next day, the picture being repeatedly shown on the SABC TV news channel was that of a freak accident in which the attacking predator had bumped into the cage, got entangled and almost killed its occupant. We thanked our stars. Let the monster rue but we were the ones that got away.