Hundreds of cattle from Tamil Nadu that stray into the Male Mahadeshwara Wildlife Sanctuary in Chamarajanagar district are leaving bald patches in the forests.

ADVERTISEMENTWith more than 2,000 cattle entering the sanctuary for grazing everyday, wild animals are also in danger of contracting foot and mouth disease, anthrax and related ailments.

About 77 km of the sanctuary shares the border with Tamil Nadu border. Of this, 21 km adjoins Salem, Erode and Dharmapuri territorial forests. The remaining is surrounded by the Sathyamangalam Tiger Reserve.

With rains failing in parts of Tamil Nadu, the Palar river has gone dry, forcing herds of cattle to enter the forests through this route. The short-staffed forest department is unable to check this menace.

Illegal cattle sheds (doddis) have sprung up on the Tamil Nadu border from where the cattle are let into the forests during the day. The cattle are not reared for milk, but their dung is sent to coffee estates in Kerala as manure and the healthy ones to slaughter houses there. 

The network is said to be operating from Tamil Nadu. The green pastures in the forest are ideal feeding ground for elephants, which could face food shortage with cattle grazing on plants and bamboo bushes and leading to man-animal conflicts.

Moreover, the sanctuary is also frequented by tigers coming out in search of prey. There is a proposal before the government to declare it a tiger reserve. With cattle from the surrounding villages entering the forests, the wild animals’ food chain could be affected. Deputy Conservator of Forests M Malathi Priya told Deccan Herald that there were more than 25 cattle sheds around the Male Mahadeshwara Wildlife Sanctuary in 2010. A few people from Tamil Nadu had been rearing cattle at the sheds by paying the cowherds. 

“In 2011, the forest department had cleared the sheds. But, cattle are entering forests from sheds on the Tamil Nadu border. 

The menace can be controlled if the territorial forests are declared wildlife sanctuaries. A high-level meeting of Bandipur Inter-state Forest departments held in Gundlupet recently had suggested this to their Tamil Nadu counterparts,” she added.