The changing scenario in Kodagu in terms of climate has raised serious concerns among the people, especially agriculturists and environmentalists.ADVERTISEMENTThe two-yearly report on the condition of forests in the district, released recently by the Ministry of Forests, Government of India, rings a warning bell on the increasing pace of deforestation in the district. The report has pointed out the fact that the forest cover in Kodagu has depleted by 102 square km.Forest Department officials say that there are a lot of trees in the forest. The highest number of trees felled were in private lands. But in reality, forests have very few trees left. The Forest Department is hit by acute staff shortage and patrolling is not done on a regular basis, to the advantage of poachers.The ecological balance of Kodagu, an eco-sensitive region, has largely been dependent on the amount of rainfall it receives. Due to the absence of sufficient rainfall, the catchment area of river Cauvery is not getting enough water. This has been a regular feature in recent years.The quantity of annual rainfall in Bhagamandala, Talacauvery, Cherambane, Napoklu, Chettimani, Bettageri and the surrounding regions has come down to a mere 120 inches from 300 inches per annum.It has been more than a decade since Bhagamandala has been waterlogged for a month. During the past two years, Bhagamandala was inundated for a maximum of two days during the rainy season. Encroachment of forest lands and excessive deforestation in the Shola forest range in Talacauvery Wildlife Zone have negatively impacted rainfall.Growers have also played a significant role in deforestation. Pepper growers have been felling naturally grown trees and replacing them with silver oaks as pepper vines could not be cultivated on wild trees. Trees in private lands are being extensively cut for the construction of home-stays. The type of changes in the crop pattern and over-emphasis on commercial crops have resulted in noticeable climate changes.As many tributaries of river Cauvery had a good groundwater level, water could be obtained at a shallow level when digging wells a few years earlier. But, today, water can be obtained only after going as deep as 300 feet.Growers say that they are not getting enough water even during in February and March, which is the crucial season.In the district, 7,358.89 acres of forest land has encroached for housing, cultivation and community establishments. 2,012 acres is cleared of encroachments. 3,728 families dwell in the encroached forest land.