Jungle Lodges and Resorts (JLR), which is branded as the promoter of wildlife tourism in the State, is now foraying into coastal and temple circuits.

ADVERTISEMENTScuba-diving, snorkeling, temple tours, golf, health and heritage sites have not been JLR’s focus going by its name and history since 1980s. However, the State-owned firm is now planning several resorts to tap the potential of these activities.

JLR, which already has resorts adjacent to the forests of Bandipur, Nagarhole, Anshi Dandeli tiger reserves and Cauvery wildlife sanctuaries, has now finished work on a resort in Hampi. “We have also begun construction of resorts in Bidar to tap the tourism potential. It will be ready for occupation within a few months,” said Sanjai Mohan, Executive Director, JLR.

Besides, JLR is setting up resorts at Jog Falls, at Honnavara and Pilikula in Dakshina Kannada. According to Mohan, the resort at Pilikula will focus on wellness. “We want to make it an ayurveda hub. We are already in discussion with ayurveda experts. We also held a discussion with the Department of Ayush. They will guide us in this directions,” Mohan said.

In addition to it, JLR will also be tapping the potential of golf in tourism. A resort is being planned adjacent to Belgaum golf course on an 18-acre land. Each of these resorts with about 20 rooms is expected to cost JLR about Rs 3.5 crore to Rs 4 crore.

The JLR is also planning a scuba-diving school at the biodiversity heritage site in Nethrani Islands near Karwar. “For those who are afraid of scuba-diving, we have an alternative. We are procuring about six glass-bottom boats that will enable people to view the coral reefs,” he said.

Projects approved

The Centre has approved all these projects for the year 2012-13, Mohan said and added that these projects will not divert JLR away from its focus area. “For instance, the resort at Hampi will also include a package to visit the sloth bear sanctuary at Daroji and the one at Bidar will focus on dryland mammals.”

The JLR also plans to procure six caravans (vehicles fitted with all the amenities like bedroom and a toilette) at an estimated cost of Rs 75 lakh each.