The Karnataka Lokayukta has directed the Forest department to initiate action against persons responsible for the illegal felling of trees and construction of road in the Devarayanadurga forest area of Tumkur district, six years after a complaint was filed.

ADVERTISEMENTFollowing a complaint by Tumkur-based naturalist Ameen Ahmed on October, 17, 2013, the Lokayukta has now directed the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (PCCF) to take action to prevent any illegal activities going on in the Devarayanadurga forest and report the action taken within a month.

Ahmed had filed a complaint against the Forest department, after he found illegal felling of trees and widening of road between  Swandenahalli and Durgadahalli villages, connecting the Chinnaga Rangaswamy temple in the Devarayanadurga forests, which draws thousands of devotees. 

Permission not obtained

The cart road leading to the temple was widened to accommodate bigger vehicles, without obtaining due permission from the Forest department or the Government of India under the Forest Conservation Act, 1980. 

The matter came to light accidently when two members of Tumkur-based Wildlife Aware Nature Club - Guruprasad and Mallikarjuna M - visited the place for bird watching in October 2007. 

The duo complained to the department, but to their dismay during their second visit, they found people felling trees without fear. Ahmed is also a member of the Club.

The complainant discovered that the road work was funded by a prominent politician from Tumkur and the work was being carried out by a contractor named Prakash Beeranakallu of Byrenahalli in Tumkur. Alleging that the local forest officials are hand in glove with the violators to gain favours from the politician funding this project, Ahmed filed this complaint.

Inquiry

After a detailed inquiry which concluded on October 26, 2013, the Lokayukta directed the Forest department to file a charge sheet against the contractors Beeranakallu and Nagaraj Yellapura. 

“The Tumkur deputy commissioner (DC) has also been directed to submit information in respect of the Assistant Engineer (AE), Public Works Department, in whose period the illegal road widening was done and the Range Forest Officer, Tumkur range, has been directed to submit a charge sheet against the Assistant Engineer as soon as he receives information from the Deputy Commissioner,” the Lokayukta order dated October 28 says.

The Principal Chief Conservator of Forests be directed to take action to prevent illegal activities in Devarayanadurga and other forest areas of Tumkur and submit the action taken report within a month,” the order states further .