The fire which ravaged several forests of the State this February was not an accident but a man-made act, according to the report of the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife).

ADVERTISEMENTB K Singh, PCCF, in his report to the State government, has stated that a total of 3,624 hectares of forest land were affected by the fire. However, there has been no damage to the flora and fauna or the wildlife in the forests, except 460 hectares in Nagarahole National Park. 

People living on the periphery of the forests have the practice of setting fire to the forest land situated close to their farmlands. The residents usually do so during summer, with the intention of expanding the extent of their agricultural land. They take care to see  that their property is not destroyed in the fire set by them. However, there are possibilities of the fire spreading to the core area of the forest, according to the report.

People displaced by the Sharavathi hydel project now reside in Manjarikoppa and Maleshankara forest areas. They have set fire to Maleshankara and Kudi forests to expand their farmlands. The tribals inhabiting Biligirirangaswamy Temple Wildlife Sanctuary and Nagarahole National Park set the forest on fire to collect minor forest produce and to facilitate growth of grass. Some tribals resort to the act out of the grudge they nurse against the Forest department. 

Dried bamboo clumps facilitated the fire to spread rapidly. The report says that the request of the Deputy Conservator of Forests, Shimoga, to arrest the spread of the fire had not been considered.

A dried bamboo clump was set on fire by a resident in Alase village in Kudi forest area on February 23. The flames were brought under control with the help of extinguishers. A few people of Basavanagadde and Shiranalli villages set fire to the forest on the pretext of preventing the spread of Kyasanur disease. 

The fire which was found around Basavanagadde on February 26 was brought under control by next day evening. It was found that the personnel of the Fire department refused to extend any assistance to the Forest officials in dousing the fire, the report notes. The report also states that Range Four of Nagarahole forest was set on fire at the instigation of some non-governmental organisations.