Salman Khan's "Hum Aapke Hain Koun..!" co-star Renuka Shahane today questioned the superstar's acquittal in two cases related to poaching of chinkaras in Jodhpur in 1998.
ADVERTISEMENTRenuka took to Facebook to not only question the judgement but also the delay in it. The 51-year-old actress also pointed out why rest of the stars were left out of the purview of the judgement.

At that time of the alleged incidents, Salman was shooting for the film "Hum Sath Sath Hain" in Jodhpur with Saif Ali Khan, Tabu, Sonali Bendre and Neelam.

Two separate cases were registered against Salman under section 51 of Wildlife Protection Act for poaching of two chinkaras in village Bhawad on September 26-27, 1998 and one chinkara in Mathania (Ghoda Farm) on September 28-29, 1998.

The Rajasthan High Court held that the pellets recovered from the chinkaras were not fired from Salman's licensed gun.

"In 1998 a Black Buck & 2 Chinkaras (that are endangered species & therefore cannot be killed) were allegedly killed on a hunting trip that included Salman Khan, Saif Ali Khan, Amrita Singh, Tabu & Sonali Bendre.

"Somehow while the 'mor' was 'naaching' in their 'hivdas' they wanted to shoot some endangered animals. And they did & ate them too. But did they? Out of all only Salman was charged for killing a black buck & a chinkara. He also served time for the same in Jodhpur jail. No charges were framed against the others," Renuka posted.

However, this was not a verified Facebook account.

Renuka said the judgement raises the question about who killed the chinkaras.

"So now after 18 years he has been acquitted of charges in both cases. Some questions come to mind: Who killed the Black Buck & the Chinkaras? Did the driver kill them? Did nobody kill them? Do judges decide according to Buckworth-Lewis method? (What? Er... it's Duckworth-Lewis?)

"Who will pay for the mental torture that Salman has had to go through now that he has been declared not guilty? Doesn't the nation want to know the truth? ( preferably very loudly) What? The nation doesn't want to know? No? Why? Oh you don't say... busy spending bucks on Sultan... Er... then let it pass... yeah the Buck, what else? Dear, deer! Surreal!?"