Kudremukh National Park is an important protected area in the Western Ghats region, extending over 630 sq km in Chikkamagaluru, Dakshina Kannada and Udupi districts of Karnataka. The Park comprises montane grasslands with tropical forests. It has shola forests (local name for patches of stunted tropical montane forest) interspersed with grasslands. The unique ecosystem which gives birth to 4 rivers.

Two of these rivers, Gurupura and Netravathi, are west flowing, while Tunga and Bhadra are east flowing. The rivers support several power, irrigation and drinking water projects for many towns and villages. During the rains, water is stored in the roots of trees in the subsurface. There are numerous perennial water streams starting in shola forests and contributing to these rivers. Any damage to the ecosystem would result in the depletion of the flow of the stream.

As much as 48 sq km of the forest area of this landscape was leased to Kudremukh Iron Ore Company Limited (KIOCL) in 1969 for iron ore mining for 30 years. But mining activities continued even after the expiry of the lease. So, Wildlife First, an NGO led by Praveen Bhargav, made efforts for termination of this mining lease and succeeded. Mining was stopped by the order of the Supreme Court in 2005, but it took some more time to dismantle the infrastructure.

I happened to camp there recently and visited some shola forests and grasslands. I also climbed the Kudremukh peak. Although the Forest Department had taken up several fire protection measures, it was very distressing to note that many grasslands had been burnt and trees on the fringes of shola forests are scorched. This results in the shrinking of shola forests and affects its water holding capacity. The flow of the streams, especially during summer months would deplete. The expansion of unwanted Pteridium (a kind of fern) in grassy areas is also a matter of concern.

Raging fire
I ascertained the reasons for large scale burning of these grasslands. Villagers believe that if the grassland is burnt, new flesh of grass would grow, which would be more palatable to cattle. Here, 9 tribal families were granted the individual rights under the Forest Rights Act, but their community right for water supply was rejected. People from Mulloli and many adjoining villages were reportedly aggrieved by the measures taken by the Forest Department and went on to put fire in the grasslands. The villagers were aggressive in setting fire, despite heavy presence of the department in the area. Because of the vastness of the area, no sooner was fire extinguished in a patch, and the department personnel, to their dismay, found fire in other patches. This went on unabated till large extent of grasslands and forests were burnt.

There are several private enclosures in the National Park, where 1382 families reside. Of them, 536 families have shown their willingness to relocate. During the last 7 years, more than Rs 50 crore has been utilised and 190 families have been relocated, adding an area of 375 acres to the National Park. In 2011, Government of Karnataka had proposed this area as a tiger reserve and the central government had accepted the proposal. Public representatives were not comfortable with it, launched protests and the State government backtracked. 

To increase the status of protection in such a sensitive landscape, some additional forest area was proposed to be added to the National Park in 2011. The proposal met the roadblock as several public representatives were against it. It is high time that we adequately protect such a sensitive landscape, which is the source for the lifeline for towns and villages on its east as well as on the west. In order to ensure that the flow of natural streams are maintained, the forests and grasslands must be protected from fire, grazing, illicit cutting of trees and encroachment. It is time we understand that if the grasslands burn, sholas will shrink and eventually natural streams will die.

(The author is retired principal chief conservator of forests, Karnataka)ADVERTISEMENT