Training programme for volunteers participating in the quadrennial Tiger Census began in various parts of Chamarajanagar and Mysore districts, here on Monday. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe survey will be taken up in a total area of 2,854 square kilometers, of which 2,536 square kilometers are reserve forests. 

The survey will assess the number of tigers, elephants, leopards and other animals inside the reserve forest.

In Chamarajanagar district, a total of 231 line transects have been marked.
 Depending on the number of volunteers participating in the survey, one or two volunteers will be deputed per line transect. On Monday and Tuesday, the volunteers are being trained on data collection methods used in the survey.

Survey of carnivores will be held from December 18 to 20 and herbivores from December 21 to 23. Volunteers have been provided accommodation at Anti-Poaching Camps spread inside the reserve forests.

Bandipur Tiger Reserve is among the forests in the country with a high density of tiger population, with the last Tiger Census projecting that about 100 tigers lived in the reserve.

Director, Bandipur Tiger Reserve, H C Kantharaju said that in the 13 forest ranges of the reserve, a total of 115 line transects, each measuring five kilometers have been marked. On the first day, 100 volunteers have arrived for the survey, with 130 volunteers expected to arrive today.

Among other reserves in Chamarajanagar district, 45 line transects have been marked at BRT tiger reserve, where 47 volunteers will participate in the survey. 

The number of line transects at Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary and Male Mahadeshwara Wildlife Sanctuary are 33 and 30 respectively.

Camera Ban

Chief Conservator of Forests of Chamarajanagar circle, Dileep Kumar Das said that volunteers will not be allowed to carry cameras during the survey. “If we allow cameras, volunteers will busy themselves in clicking pictures, affecting the survey,” he said.

In Hassan about 70 volunteers will be participating in the tiger census, said DCF Appu Rao. 

It is said that there are three tigers in Sakleshpur in Hassan district. But the number of leopards may be more. A clear picture will emerge after completion of the census, he said.