BUCKET LIST OF A TRAVELOHOLICSarika PanditFingerprint2014, pp 240250

ADVERTISEMENTThe genre of travel writing is being fully subscribed to, now more than ever. It has caught the fancy of a broad spectrum of professions including fallouts from the big-buck-making corporate and tech worlds too. And what’s more, many resort to putting down on paper their experiences. Writing a book is everyone’s dream now. The implications are encouraging.

 It means people are following their dreams. It means that Bing Crosby’s haunting song about visiting “far way places with strange sounding names…” is a universal desire. It also means that by travelling and sharing experiences, one realises that expressing oneself in a creative manner is not just the prerogative of the chosen few like Bruce Chatwin or Pico Iyer. And though the angst of Chatwin or the wry humour of Iyer is missing, this book is still a pleasant read. 

In this small but descriptive book, Sarika Pandit lives her dream. By the time she is 30, she would have all the pages of her passport stamped. Not only does she achieve that, she also fulfils her dream that she would walk into a bookshop and see a book written by her. In the course of fulfilling her dream, she also realises that it is not just the destination that matters, but the journey also holds a special significance. It echoes the famous lines of  poet C P Cavafy in Ithaka: “You will be wealthy with all that you have gained on the way.”

In the process, this under-30 B-school graduate gets lost in a Spanish night and experiences numbing fear of being assaulted, has claustrophobia in a tunnel into a sarcophagus in Egypt, follows the footsteps of the Bard in England, walks in the shoes of the Renaissance giants in Florence, becomes a chocoholic in Brussels, gets gloriously drunk in Greece, quenches her curiosity about vampires in Romania, gawks at the wildlife in Africa, falls in love with some hot guides and gets grilled about her political beliefs in Israel. She also gets a snake round her neck in Morocco, stalks the brooding memory of Kafka in Prague, sees the apt but oddly named Museum of Broken Relationships in Croatia and exposes herself to jazz in Slovenia. 

One hilarious episode involved a piece of cake called the over-murrrra — said with rrrolling pronunciation. It was only many ‘murrrra’ articulations later from everyone that she realised that mura in Slovenia meant ‘river’.

Along the way, she also collects fridge magnets from each country, making for a colourful collage. When she sees them she also realises that it is about “owning that experience”. And she meets people, both from that country and others passing through — like her who take something invaluable from each country, a little knowledge, a little awareness. Unfortunately, there is only one chapter on an Indian destination — Khajuraho. But may be there is another book in the making. And no passport required!

She has an epiphany twice in this book. Once in Israel when an innocuous bracelet with an Urdu inscription on her friend’s wrist brought out a barrage of angry questions from a customs official, she realises that; “I was glad that I was an Indian, glad that I lived in a country where, for the most part, its people could walk through walls, climb over them, heck, even pee on them without having to worry about being shot in the head.” 

The second time was in Morocco, when in the desert, she decides that she was going to give up her job and travel; “The memory I would carry would be that of a calm that comes after a decision is made. A calm mirroring sleeping dunes under a silent, serene star-studded sky.” And so the traveller finds a bit of herself on each journey.