Weather radar clutter is boon for biologists

ADVERTISEMENTScientists may have found the silver lining in that large cloud of radar information that weather forecasters discard because it is produced by birds, bats and insects. While this information is just clutter to the weather folks, it’s just the thing biologists need to study the activities of flying creatures, a science newly christened aeroecology.

“Radar provides us an unprecedented tool for observing bats and birds,” Winifred F Frick of the University of California, Santa Cruz, explained at the annual convention of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.

Typically bats, insects and birds have small bodies which make them difficult to observe, she said. Frick said the radars are helping researchers study foraging behaviour and now researchers can also observe migratory patterns, seasonal changes in behaviour and the effect of variations in climate.

New York Times News Service

Army and green initiatives

While there are several green initiatives taken up by NGOs and corporate houses in the country, the Armed Forces also seems to be doing its bit for the nation in terms of preserving greenery and taking up eco-friendly, conservation measures.

The Army can do a lot to protect nature and wildlife because it has access to areas so remote that many State and Central government departments also can’t reach. Jawans, can for instance, be told to pick up firewood from fallen trees and branches and never by felling trees.

When this writer was commissioned as an officer in an Army Infantry Battalion, the Commanding Officer (CO) appointed him as a garden member of the Officers’ Mess Committee. After procuring and sowing seeds from Sutton Seeds Company, Kolkata, a garden with a beautiful grass lawn and myriad winter flowers ranging from colourful phlox, salvia, gaillardia, poppy, godetia, pansy, petunia, dahlias and so on took shape. 

Later, as a Major in the Army and commanding a rifle company, one noticed that the jungles of J&K are clean with natural grass spread at the roots of pine trees unlike the jungles in the North-East where there’s lots of undergrowth between tall trees with slush, insects and leeches. At one place, there was a hill top with the most beautiful and serene natural lawn enveloping the space amongst pine trees which no gardener with the greenest thumb could develop! 

It is crucial that Armymen do their bit to ensure that such spots don’t face environmental degradation. During a tenure with the Assam Rifles in Nagaland, the company post was on a large hill with a lot of trees, which had turned into a bird sanctuary. The birds flew from tree to tree never leaving the company post for fear of being hunted by the Nagas in the villages around the hill. The staff had inadvertently become protectors of wildlife. 

Much later as the second-in-command in a battalion, arboriculture was part of this writer’s charter of duties and thousands of trees at the peace-station were planted with the help of troops. The Army has several such opportunities for green initiatives, and it is vital that awareness is created about them.

D K Havanoor