Shivanna H C and Karnataka Pradesh Kurubara Sangha had filed separate petitions challenging the reservation for the two posts. The Government issued a notification reserving the post of Mayor for Backward Caste ‘A’ category and that of Deputy Mayor for General Merit category. However, a paper publication was issued on April 7 stating that Mayor’s post would be reserved for General Merit and Deputy Mayor’s post for Scheduled Caste.

The petitioners contended that it was the mandate of the Constitution and Karnataka Municipal Corporation Act that the government should follow guidelines and provide reservation on rotation. 

They argued that the government had no authority to change the reservation after issuing the notification. They prayed the High Court to direct the government to follow the notification or stay the election to these posts.

 Justices Manjula Chellur and Mohan M Shantanagoudar issued notices and posted the matter for hearing on April 21.

Details on war memorial 

The state government has submitted to the High Court that the war memorial to be constructed at the Indira Gandhi Musical Fountain Park would consist of an underground motivational hall, artefacts of war, a monolithic stone, bugle posts and bandstand and remembrance plaques at the site. 

Krishna Apartment Owners Welfare Association has filed a petition against the construction of the war memorial in the Park alleging it would result in felling of more trees, than originally notified.

The proposal received Cabinet approval on September 17, 2009 and the National Military Memorial Trust was formed in February 2, 2009. The proposed plan requires 6 acres and 20 guntas of land. 

The monolithic stone or Veeragallu would be 60 feet in height, along with a flagpost measuring 120 feet in height which would be accompanied by  insignias of the three divisions of the military. 

The underground hall measuring 1,000 sq metres would be used for prayer and paying homage to the martyrs and would not be used for any other purpose. The government further submitted that there was no question of alienation by sale, lease or gift of land as the control of the park would vest with the government.

Judgement reserved

The High Court has reserved its judgement in the matter related to the quashing criminal proceedings against wildlife biologist Dr Ullas Karanth and others.The former Deputy Conservator of Forets, Kudremukh Wildlife Division, Anita Arekal had filed a complaint under Section 55 of Wildlife Protection Act against Karanth, Niren Jain, Praveen Bhargav, Sanjay Gubbi, K M Chinappa, D V Girish, T Poovaiah, Rohit Rao and others alleging trespassing into the Kudremukh National Park and filming mining activities.ADVERTISEMENT