Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre (WRRC), an NGO that works inside the Bannerghatta Biological Park, has expressed concern over the construction of the staff quarters, increasing the height of the compound walls, as well as the construction of a new road proposed by the BBP. ADVERTISEMENTIn a letter to the park's executive director, the WRRC pointed out that it is unwise to construct anything next to Bannerghatta Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre (BRRC), where injured and ageing wildlife are sheltered. The NGO said wild elephants, boars, leopards and venomous snakes frequent the areas. According to the NGO, chances are that the staff who will reside in these quarters would interact with wildlife, especially at nights. The WRRC stressed that the rescue and rehabilitation centre is a hospital for wild animals and birds. Any construction creating noise will disturb the already stressed wildlife, hampering their recovery. BBP executive director Dr Sanjay Bijur, however, said the quarters were not planned inside the park, but outside, near the parking lot. "As per the master plan, there was a proposal to construct 24 staff quarters. We have received approval from the governing council. We have identified the parking lot area including the KSTDC hotel. Talks are still underway," said Bijur.Dr Bijur added that there was also a proposal to raise the compound walls and erect rail track fence wherever necessary to prevent elephants from entering. There were certain flaws in the compound wall construction around the BRRC, which will have to be rectified now, he clarified. With regard to the new road, Dr Bijur said that they had proposed a new access road leading to Jigani from the park. "The alternative road will help avoid traffic jams. With too many visitors during weekends, there are massive jams from Bannerghatta Circle till the park. To have an alternative exit route for visitors, there is a proposal to construct a 2.5-km-long road, which would be constructed on Kharab and private land," he added.