We live in a world where everyone is talking but few are actually listening. ‘Talk now, listen some other time’ seems to be the mantra of the day. Dorothy Victor ruminates on the lost art of listening, wondering if poor listening is yet another by-product of all that is modern, chic and flamboyant.

ADVERTISEMENTNot until long ago the nuance in hearing and listening was well understood and appreciated. Yet, in recent times, as we build satellites, configure high-technology computers and contemplate buying space for a holiday home in Mars, there seems to be a dilution in comprehending the delicate line that separates the two.

 A recent survey done by students of Mass Communication attempted to bring out the fine difference between hearing and listening by asking the question, “What is the basic difference between hearing and listening?” Among the many answers that came in, one by an octogenarian gave a significant idea as to what could be listening that hearing is not. This is what he said, “Listening is wanting to hear.”

To listen, by this definition, includes hearing, and is more holistic. The Oxford Dictionary defines the word listen as, “attentively hear a person speaking.” Putting together the two, listening is the fine art of translating a desire to hear, into action. Sadly, in today’s ego-centric and self-serving society, this want or desire to hear another is no longer in the ‘want-list’ of a rational man. For, wanting to hear another goes beyond the comprehension of the modern man who is influenced by the culture that the less we hear, the more we are heard. Buying into this idea, we are all more-or-less, and at varying degrees, guilty of not giving our rapt attention to another during a conversation.

Plagued era

While it is tempting to blame the scenario as part and parcel of the ever-dynamic and changing world, the reality is that poor listening seems to be yet another by-product of all that is modern, chic and flamboyant.

Early man’s survival depended much on his listening skills. He had to watch out for the faintest steps of the wildlife, the slightest rumble of the sky announcing a thunderstorm, the palest reverberation in nature indicating the changing of seasons and to all the sundry sounds of the mildest warning that nature around him provided.

 Likewise, his delight in life revolved abundantly around the whisper of the breeze, the singing of the birds, the buzzing of the bees, the trickling of a spring, the rustling of the wild foliage and the hum of the universe with all its rhythms. As our forefathers lived a life of complete unison with nature, they used their natural sense of hearing to listen attentively to the world around them. This was naturally to their apparent advantage. They were in a do-or-die situation.

Primitive man evolved into a more enlightened race. Their cognitive skills widened, as did their emotional quotient. They learnt that nature’s gifts were scattered all around them. They understood the need to barter their produce and insights. They began to connect at a deeper level. Social groups were born. This gave way to the practice of sitting around campfires on cold evenings in a spirit of sharing and growing. The wisest among them chose to impart their wisdom to others in the group.

 Storytelling made its way. One man spoke while the others listened. Listening was more with their hearts than with their ears. This left the speaker and the listener connected. There was free flow of messages between the speaker and the listener. The vibe was harmonious and communication was effective, satisfying and complete.

However, as man began to make progress, he felt the urge to be exclusive. The idea of including all within his fold no longer appealed to him. Besides, other mediums of exchange gained importance. The barter system made way to a monetary economy. Money spoke where relationships earlier did. Notes were exchanged in the place of words. Man slowly and steadily niched a place for himself where he felt special. From this cocoon, his views became unique and his perspective began to take inimitable shades. 

He had an opinion, and an unmatched one most of the time, on all matters concerning life. The problem was that everyone around him seemed to be bitten by the same bug. The inevitable outcome was that he had to assert himself, he had to be heard at any rate, and in the bargain hearing another got relegated to the backseat. Welcome to the era plagued by poor listening.

The odds at stake

In a crowded congregation, the pastor in the middle of his sermon on ‘how to reach heaven’, found some people self-absorbed, some having blank expressions, several with a faraway gaze, still few with an indifferent stare and many others with sleepy countenances. Bang in the middle of his discourse, he paused to say, “I am sure no one here wants to go to hell.” Not much of a response ensued. He then raised his voice and affirmed aloud, “Stand up those who want to.” In less than a few seconds, he was mortified to see the entire gathering stand up in stark obedience! If that sounds farfetched, a host once reported her first-hand experience at poor listening from her guests.  Serving them home-baked patties, she said merrily, “Try these, I have stuffed them with ptomaine.” Without a hint of hesitation, the ladies were quick to add in unison, “They look splendid, you must share the recipe!”

The above two examples are evidently the result of poor listening. As much as we would like to think ourselves to be good listeners, the reality is that most of us are not. This can probably be attributed to the glaring discrepancy that exists between the words we speak in a minute and the words we think in that same time. It is said that we can speak at about 150-200 words per minute and think at four or five times that rate. This means that even as we try to absorb the words we hear, we begin to think way ahead. The result is a premature evaluation of the subject matter. Besides, the intuitive reactions of forming impressions, drawing conclusions and preparing our replies, kick in within split seconds of being spoken to.

What all this means is that we only partially hear what is being said. In addition, a dogged enthusiasm to make an impression in a conversation is an obstruction to listening. We begin rehearsing our answers, losing out on undivided attention to what is being said. An incident that happened in the early years of my working life comes to my mind. A few dignitaries from the head office made a visit to our local office. While doing the rounds, the vice-president, a very congenial man, stopped at my cubicle for a chat. Noticing a desk calendar of sparkling lakes on my table, he began to talk freely about his recent holiday to a hill station and the paddling he had undertaken with his sons on one of its lakes. Eager to impress him, I simply switched off my hearing and began rehearsing my own account of a similar holiday I had taken to another hill station.

 However, I did notice that he stopped brusquely and asked, “So, what would you say to that?” Caught unawares, I just mumbled, “Well, sounds like fun.” Getting red under his collar, he exclaimed, “You call that fun? I actually told you that our boat capsized and we almost drowned!” I never forgot the embarrassment I felt. What should have been a pleasant interaction turned into a nightmare I wish to forget, all because I simply did not listen!

Why listen?

Poor listening comes naturally to a common man of the third millennium. This is largely due to the fact that while years of training go towards reading and writing, listening as a skill has never really been taught or consciously acquired. Besides, most people also believe in the myth that rising up the social ladder depends largely on the ability to hold forth in a conversation, talk freely on any subject under the sun and cut the other in a conversation with our own impressive tales. But sadly, when a society is afflicted by this poor listening, communication is distorted, incomplete, flawed and dominated by assumptions. Most importantly, commu-nication is never effective or productive in such a scenario. Considering that we spend most of our waking hours communicating, the need to rid us of this syndrome of poor listening takes an unprecedented urgency.

Undoubtedly, effective communication, characterised by rapt listening, is the single most important key that is required to unlock the door that will lead us to a world of deeper relationships and wider acceptance. “Listening,” said Dr Karl Menninger, the American psychiatrist, “is a magnetic and strange thing, a creative force. The friends who listen to us are the ones we move toward and we want to sit in their radius. When we are listened to, it creates us, makes us unfold and expand.”

Wake up to listening

Listening well, ultimately, is a very essential attribute in every sphere of life, most of all, a priceless gift in handling people. It is so vital that George C Marshall, an American military leader who was noted as the “organiser of victory” by Winston Churchill for his leadership of the Allied victory in World War II, once noted, “The formula for handling people is this: firstly, listen to the other person’s story; secondly, listen to the other person’s full story; thirdly, listen to the other person’s full story first!”

In his bestseller The seven habits of highly effective people, Stephen R Covey clearly puts listening skills as one of the noteworthy habits of all successful men. In the chapter, ‘Seek first to understand, then to be understood’, he outlines all the principles of empathetic communication. He highlights the theory of understanding first the other person in a conversation. This, apparently, he concludes, is at the heart of a good listener and the core of any good conversation. In his words, “When we really, deeply understand each other, we open the door to creative solutions and third alternatives. Our differences are no longer stumbling blocks to communication and progress. Instead, they become the stepping stones to synergy.”

The good news is that though our dreary world is bursting with poor listeners, we can tweak our talking skills a bit to the listening side with some effort and daily practice. Just as a muscle is strengthened with constant use, so will our sensory perception of hearing. Rather than use our vocal cords all the time, using our ear drums often, through attentive hearing, will sharpen our listening skills. The need to use our two ears twice as much as we use our one mouth is perhaps an idea that is not only praiseworthy, but a useful one as well. Eventually, good listeners are not only popular everywhere, but after a while they know something!

In the hierarchy of listening skills ‘empathy’ is at its crowning glory. There is a Native American maxim which says, “Never judge a man until you have walked in his moccasins.” Understanding where the other person comes from and directing all listening from that outlook will help in getting to be a good listener.

Going beyond words

The listening skill pyramid, beneath empathy, is a myriad one of simple humane recipes. Listening with our whole self, letting go of talking from time to time, encouraging the other to talk, boosting the talker’s morale through appropriate positive comments, making an attempt to go beyond words and developing sensitivity for all that is unsaid, collectively make up an individual who will become worthy for an Oscar nomination for the best silent support actor in an action blockbuster!

The acid test for a good listener, ultimately, is his wisdom in shutting his ears to noise and opening his senses to all that is silent in this wonderful universe of ours. Perhaps, this is the paradox of good listening. Andre Kostelanetz, a Russian orchestral music conductor and one of the pioneers of easy listening music, articulated the concept eloquently. In his words, “We listen too much to the telephone, and we listen too little to nature. The wind is one of my sounds — a lonely sound, but soothing. Everybody should have their personal sounds to listen to — sounds that make them exhilarate and alive, or quiet and calm. As a matter of fact, one of the greatest sounds of all — and to me, it is a sound — is utter, complete silence.”

In this buzzing, 24x7, nonstop and vibrant world, where there is no moment for remaining quiescent, the mob psychology of moving with the flow, going in sync with the times and living the clamorous life seem to be the answer to life’s many complex questions. “Buy now, pay later; talk now, listen some other time,” is the philosophy that makes for a good bargain. Even so, some age-old wisdom never changes. 

Silence remains superior to speech. When a man whose marriage was in trouble sought his advice, the Master said, “You must listen to your wife.”  The man took this advice and returned after a month to say he had learned to listen to every word his wife was saying.  Said the Master instantaneously with a smile, “Now, go home and listen to every word she isn’t saying!”