The Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP) will soon house rescued tigers, for which the Mysuru zoo had been the lone destination for some time now. BBP has been a shelter for rescued wild leopards in the last one year and will now house tigers too.

This comes after Bornfree Foundation (BFF), an international charity organisation taking care of animals across the globe, renewed its contract with BBP. 

Tony Wiles, a member from BFF, visited BBP six months ago and renewed the contract, which had expired two years ago. 

“This has come as a boon to us. We had earned the title of being the hospital for injured leopards. We were getting only leopards, while all tigers were being sent to Mysuru zoo,” BBP director Range Gowda told Deccan Herald. 

“BFF has a contract only with BBP and not any other South Indian zoo. They have been working with us from 2002, ever since BBP became an independent organisation. After renewing this contract, they will adopt wild rescued tigers and take care of all their expenditure. They have decided to spend Rs 3 lakh to Rs 4 lakh annually on each tiger, Gowda said. 

The tigers adopted by BFF are not for public display. They are housed in a separate enclosure near the sloth bear Wildlife SOS Centre and bear safari. Wildlife SOS is the Indian partners of BFF. The last Indian wild rescued tiger taken care of by BFF was Maasti, who breathed his last on November 25, 2013. Presently, there is only one 14-year-old male Siberian tiger named Roque in BBP, looked after by BFF. 

In the last one year, Mysuru zoo got nine tigers, two in the last six months. This includes the maneater captured near Belagavi. 

BBP got six leopards in the last six months alone, of which four were sent to the Ballari zoo. 

This was not only because Ballari zoo needed carnivores, but also because BBP could not manage so many leopards. 

According to officials of the Zoo Authority of Karnataka and Forest department, the tigers were sent to Mysuru all this while because BBP lacked trained expertise and did not have sufficient resources like Mysuru zoo. BBP is also set to have an exclusive leopard safari, apart from the lion and tiger safaris.  ADVERTISEMENTRange Gowda, BBP Director: Bornfree Foundation has a contract only with BBP and not any other South Indian zoo. They have been working with us since 2002. After renewing this contract, they will adopt wild rescued tigers and take care of all their expenditure. They have decided to spend Rs 3 lakh to Rs 4 lakh annually on each tiger