Considering the environmental significance of the riverine eco-system around Sattegala bridge, Bharachukki and Gaganachukki falls, a proposal has been sent to the State Government to declare the region as Wesley Bird Sanctuary.

ADVERTISEMENTThe Sanctuary will be a stretch of four to five kilometers, and has been identified as one of the important habitation of birds in the region. Lok Adalat member, A N Yellappa Reddy, who had conducted a spot inspection, said that the region where two tributaries of River Cauvery meet, also played an important role in regulating pollution of the river due to an indiscriminate use of pesticides in farms. 

The sanctuary will be located in Mandya and Chamarajanagar districts. Even though the proposal was in preliminary stages, the Forest department has already started work to conserve the region.

Speaking to Deccan Herald, Javed Mumthaz, Deputy Conservator of Forests, Malemahadeshwara Wildlife Sanctuary said that the sanctuary was along the banks of River Cauvery. 

“The Revenue department has already handed over one kilometer stretch along the river. We have started a plant nursery and are making preparations to build some islands for birds to nest,” he said.

Mahseer fish

The proposed sanctuary is also a habitat of a species of Mahseer fish, a protected species which is endemic to the region. With the proposed sanctuary conservation measures of the fish species will also get a boost.

“A few years ago, the fish was on the verge of extinction, as local fishermen were involved in dynamite fishing. We have taken steps to stop such activities and the number of mahseers is recovering,” he said. Poaching was also rampant, which is now being controlled, he added.

A preliminary survey of the number of bird species was also conducted. While 60 species of birds were identified during the preliminary survey, a comprehensive survey will shed light into the various species of the region. 

Sources said that private land has also to be acquired to declare the region as bird sanctuary, which the source added might delay the process.