Karnataka, trying to hard sell its tourism sector globally, did some aggressive marketing of its heritage sites, coastal lines, religious places and wildlife spots to the prospective investors at the second edition of the Global Investors Meet on Friday. The State government inked agreements promising private investment of about Rs 35,000 crore. 

Karnataka, in terms of tourist inflow, occupies fourth position in the country, while Andhra Pradesh stands first. In 2010, Karnataka witnessed 3.85 crore tourist footfall, while it went up to 8.46 crore in 2011 due to aggressive marketing of tourism sector. The aim is to reach 10 crore by in the next couple of years. 

If the promises made at the GIM over the last two days stands true, seaplane service, an international golf course in Mangalore, an ayurvedic health resort in Hampi and more will come up. Maritime Energy Heli Air Service of Mumbai signed an MoU with the State tourism department to invest Rs 96.50 crore to introduce seaplane facility. 

Vishwanth Reddy K, Director of Tourism Department, said the company intends to introduce the amphibian plane service not only in the coastal but also areas where water bodies such as dams and reservoirs are situated.  

“For seaplanes, there is no need for airports. Aeroplanes directly takeoff and land on water. Dams like Almatti and reservoirs besides coast can be used for promoting seaplane toruism,” he said.ADVERTISEMENTLata Krishna Rao, Principal Secretary, Tourism, while addressing a session on tourism at the GIM, said the State is keen on attracting private investment for golf course development across the State. As the State has good weather for major part of the year, golf can be tapped as a potential tourism destination. Opus Hotel & Resorts has tied up with the government to develop a hotel with a golf course in Mangalore. It is expected to invest Rs 1,681 crore. There are about 18 golf centres in the State, and Bangalore alone has four. 

The officer said the State is coming out with a Tourism Trade Act which can help investors understand the government polices and requirement of the sector better. The draft Act would be circulated among the stake-holders for feedback before finalizing it. Her response came when a representative of Brigade Hospitality group said that his company invested money to build a resort in Chikmagalur. But it has not progressed even after many years due to protests by green activist. It is better if the government makes it policies clear, he said. 

The tourism department has invited public private partnership (PPP) for developing 18 tourism projects. Vishwanath Reddy said that for all these 18 projects, the government would be offering land on lease. “We want Monsoon tourism to be promoted in a big way. 
Augumbe in the Malnad region has no basic amenities for tourists. So, we have private investors to  develop highway amenities. Similarly, we want to develop Pearl Valley in Anekal with a resort offering adventure sports and urban entertainment. Badami needs a five star hotel. Even Jog requires an eco resort/adventure sports. We are sure of getting investments. On Friday, nine investors made commitments to invest Rs 2,487.23 crore,” he said.