Photographs taken by  Punith Reddy speak more than a thousand words. Be it just the wick of a lamp in darkness or a tired dog on the street, each moment that he has captured on camera has a story to tell. 

ADVERTISEMENTA commerce student of CMR Institute of Management Studies, his interest in photography ignited watching his cousin pursuing photography as a profession.

 His tryst with the art started with a mobile camera and that’s how he learnt and mastered the techniques of lighting and clicking the subject from various angles.

Later on, he bought a Nikon camera and started freezing moments and memories on the small frame.    He also learnt basic tips, such as handling the camera, using it in different modes, shooting a subject and taking a picture that spans across various genres, from his mentor and one of India’s noted photographers, KS Srinivas. 

His subjects are many and varied. They include wildlife, theme-based and  candid shots, black and white ones to food pictures.  And when he is not in the City experimenting with different techniques, he can be found in Mysuru clicking casual pictures. 

conducted by various associations in his area, which is Banaswadi. “I bagged the second place at one of the events and won a Canon camea, with an extra lens and a tripod. I have also participated in festivals in various colleges like St  Joseph’s, Kristu Jayanti and CMR Institute of Management. I led a team of five for the photography events that were held in my college,” he recalls. 

He has also judged photography competitions in his college, has taken pictures for a ‘Swachh Bharat’ campaign that was held in his area, jams, car festivals and special occasions like weddings.  

photography around October. According to this innovative photographer, the key point to becoming a professional is patience. “A picture never turns out the way you want it to at the first instance. So, one has to keep trying.”   “Today, people think that owning a DSLR is synonymous with being a good photographer but that’s not true,” he adds.

“These days, kids are also interested in photography and it is a sign that the market will grow. However, to become a professional, one has to use one’s creativity and experiment with the latest techniques.” Everything around him inspires Punith. “Pictures don’t lie and that is what inspires me to continue my work. I don’t ask people to pose. I just ask them to have fun and then shoot from different angles. That is when the real personality comes across on camera,” he sums up.