Social networking has turned out to be a strong medium to spread social messages and awareness amongst masses.  

ADVERTISEMENTEnvironmental activists too are not far behind those trying to fight against corru­p­tion or making efforts to save the girl child. This, however, raises a question as to far these pages on FB and Twitter, really manage to make a difference to the cause onground. 
 
When contacted, the team of ‘Save the Tiger’ - a page on Facebook that provides daily updates on tiger poaching and government policies on protecting this endangered species, said it is the best way to reach out to the masses when it comes to conserving wildlife.

Speaking to Metrolife, Raj Krishnani, who manages the page says, “Before I started Save the Tiger page, I used to ask people what do they know about tigers. Some said they are beautiful while others said tigers are ferocious. But hardly anyone said that it was an endangered species or a species which needed to be protected. This is where awareness comes in. Whenever you use desktops, laptops or even conversing with  friends and relatives, you can educate them with the facts about tigers.”

But one wonders as to what difference does that make to stabilise the decreasing count of tigers? “To deal with an issue it is important to know the cause of its destruction. Only then can we find solutions to tackle it. The government is doing its job but there’s a lot more to be done. The Wildlife Protection Act needs to be stricter and this can only happen if people come together.”

Taking a serious note of the issue, the SC recently banned tourism in core areas of all tiger reserves. Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Bihar, Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh governments were slammed for not notifying the buffer and core areas in tiger reserves in their respective states. 

Working on the same lines of conserving  flora and fauna, Biodiversity Conservation and Awareness Society page apprises its users about the national level environment movement like Chipko Movement and Silent Valley Movement in Kerala (1973).  

Photographs of rare and endangered species are posted each day to make the users sensitive about environment and wildlife. 

According to Facebook lovers these pages definitely grab their attention. Smita Bodhankar, who is working with a wildlife organisations in the city believes that Facebook and Twitter are good mediums to sensitise youth. “The best part of these pages is that young girls and boys are searching career opportunities in wildlife sector. They are ready to volunteer for field work. Though it’s a slow process it is a step forward in bringing about a revolution in the coming years.”