The state government is gearing up to set up a mini hydel project next to the Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary, an elephant corridor, even as cases of jumbos straying out of forest areas in search of water and food and getting killed are on the rise.

ADVERTISEMENTThe proposed mini-hydel project will violate the directions issued by the Karnataka High Court in 2008 that no projects can come up in and around elephant corridors. Taking suo motu action to ensure that there is no destruction of elephant corridors, the court had formed the elephant task force. 

The proposed project near Gaganachukki-Bharachukki waterfalls in Malavalli taluk of Mandya district was opposed by several agencies in the past. However, the government now seems to be keen on reviving the proposal. It recently asked senior officials of Forest department to visit the proposed project spot and submit a report. Under ‘pressure from political bosses,’ a team visited the area. The project is just 200 metres from the waterfalls. 

“Based on the recommendations of the state government, a committee comprising Principal Chief Conservator of Forests P Suresh and B J Hosmath and other senior officials visited the place. The committee members were directed to visit the location and submit a project feasibility report,” a Forest department official told DH.
 
“The committee has inspected the place. It will hold a meeting in three to four days. Based on the recommendations made at the meeting, a report will be prepared and submitted to the government,” the official added. 

“It is unfortunate that when there is water crisis in Karnataka and, man-animal conflicts are increasing, the government is pressing for power generation projects on forest borders. Increasing urbanisation has led to the death of three elephants on the outskirts of Bengaluru in the last 10 days,’’ an official said. 

The project, experts opine, will not only lead to further depletion of water table but also curtail water supply to Bengaluru. 

In the past, the hydel project had met with opposition from many quarters, including the State Wildlife Board. Cricketer and former vice chairman of Wildlife Board Anil Kumble had rejected the government’s proposal. Kumble is still a member of the board. The board had also pointed that the project will lead to man-elephant conflict. 

In 2015, the secretary, Forest department, too had opposed the project stating that it will destruct wildlife habitat. In September 2016, a wildlife board meeting chaired by Chief Minister Siddaramaiah too had refused to give permission for the project.