The government will give immunity from prosecution under FEMA, Prevention of Money Laundering Act and four other laws to persons declaring undisclosed foreign assets under the compliance window of the new Black Money Act.

The one-time 90-day compliance window being provided to foreign asset holders to come clean will, however, not guarantee immunity for wealth generated from corruption, according to FAQs on Black Money law issued by the Finance Ministry today.

On the provision of the compliance rules that bars persons against whom the government has prior information for making disclosures, the Finance Ministry said declarations by such persons will be dealt under the Income Tax Act and not under the stringent Black Money law.

This concession will be available only to persons who had not received any intimation from the tax department having prior information about their foreign assets.

On whether government has any prior information, persons making declarations will be intimated by October 31, a month after the closure of 90-day compliance window on September 30.

In case they do not receive any such information, they will have to pay 30 per cent tax and an equivalent amount of penalty by December 31.

Disclosures made, the FAQs said, will enjoy "immunity from prosecution under the five Acts viz. the Income-tax Act, Wealth Tax Act, FEMA, Companies Act and Customs Act."

It, however, does not provide immunity from prosecution under 'any other Act'.

Giving example, the FAQ said, if the undisclosed asset has been acquired out of the proceeds of sale of protected animals the person will not be eligible for immunity under the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972.

The offence of willful attempt to evade tax will also not be an offence under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), it added.ADVERTISEMENTThe Finance Ministry clarified that persons can take advantage of the compliance window to declare those foreign assets for which no notices have been served by the tax authorities till June 30, 2015 or about which the government has no prior information.

On whether a declaration can be made of undisclosed assets which have been assessed to tax and the case is pending before an Appellate Authority, the Ministry said, "The declarant is not entitled to re-open any assessment or reassessment made under the I-T Act. Therefore, he is not entitled to avail the tax compliance in respect of those assets.

"However, he can voluntarily declare other undisclosed foreign assets which have been acquired or made from income not disclosed and consequently not assessed under I-T Act."

With regard to applicability of the capital gains tax on foreign assets declared by assessee, the Ministry said that "the declarant will be liable for capital gains under the Income-tax Act on sale of such asset in future".

On taxation of money in foreign bank account, it said the fair market value is the sum of all the deposits made in the account computed in accordance with the rules. "Therefore, tax and penalty needs to be paid on such fair market value and not on the balance as on date," it said.

As regards inherited house property overseas, the FAQ said "the declaration has to be made by the person who inherited the property in the capacity of legal representative of his father. The fair market value of the property in his case shall be higher of its cost of acquisition and the sale price...," it said.

In case of a firm, the FAQs said the declaration with regard to the undisclosed assets will have to be filed by the firm and not the partners. The partners, however, can file declaration in respect of an undisclosed asset held by him.

In case of a company declaring undisclosed assets, it said, the directors will not be liable for any offence under the Income-tax Act, Wealth-tax Act, FEMA, Companies Act and the Customs Act. 

The Ministry said it is advisable to declare all the undisclosed foreign assets even if the fair market value as computed in accordance with rules comes to nil. "This may avoid initiation of any inquiry under the Act in the future in case such asset comes to the notice of the Assessing Officer," it added.

It also clarified that a person who lived abroad and acquired the asset out of his income chargeable to tax in India would be required to declare them under the black money law.

However, he will not be required to declare his assets if he had acquired them from income which was not chargeable to tax in India.

The Ministry made it clear that persons who had acquired overseas assets from the money earned through corruption will not be allowed to take advantage of the compliance window to come clean.

"However, if such a declaration is made and in an event it is found that the asset represented money earned through corruption it would amount to misrepresentation of facts and the declaration shall be void...If a declaration is held as void, the provisions of the Act shall apply in respect of such asset as they apply in relation to any other undisclosed foreign asset," it added.

The Ministry clarified that the persons will be required to disclose their assets acquired out of undisclosed income even if they had been disposed off and were not held on the date of declaration.

On whether further enquiry would be made by tax officials after declaration of the assets, the Ministry said, "After the declaration is made, the Principal Commissioner/Commissioner will enquire whether any information has been received by the competent authority in respect of the assets declared.

"Apart from this no other enquiry will be conducted by him at the time of declaration."

The Ministry said that "beneficial owner" of the assets would be required to declare the assets. For the purpose of the Act, the "beneficial owner" would mean an individual who has provided, directly or indirectly, consideration for the asset for the immediate or future benefit. 

The Finance Ministry further said any person against whom search and survey operations have been initiated would not be entitled to make voluntary declaration with respect to those assets.

With regard to the assets about which the government has prior information, the Ministry said, "The person cannot make a declaration of an undisclosed foreign asset where the central government has received an information in respect of such asset under the DTAA.

"The person is entitled for voluntary declaration in respect of other undisclosed foreign assets for which no information has been received."

On how the person declaring overseas assets will know whether the government has prior information, the FAQs clarified, "after the person has filed a declaration, which is to be filed latest by September 30, 2015, he will be issued intimation by the Principal Commissioner/Commissioner by October 31, 2015, whether any information has been received by the Government and consequently whether he is eligible to make the payment on the declaration made.

"If no information has been received up to June 30, 2015 by the government in respect of such assets the person will be allowed a time up to December 31, 2015 for payment of tax and penalty in respect of the declared asset...In respect of the ineligible assets provisions of the Income-tax Act shall apply."

The assets about which the information is already available under DTAA and have been duly declared in good faith under the tax compliance but are not found eligible, will not attract the provisions of the Black Money law. "However, such information may be used for the purpose of the Income-tax Act," it added.

On consequences of non-declaration of assets acquired prior to the commence of the Act, the Ministry said, "Such assets shall be deemed to have been acquired in the year in which it comes to the notice of the Assessing Officer and the provisions of the Act shall apply accordingly."

The Ministry further said the government will start receiving information through Automatic Exchange of Information (AEOI) route under FATCA from USA later in the year 2015 and will act accordingly.

It said the assets which are fully explained and not declared appropriately in the I-T returns will attract a penalty of Rs 10 lakhs.

"The penalty is, however, not applicable in respect of an asset being one or more foreign bank accounts having an aggregate balance not exceeding an amount equivalent to Rs 5 lakhs at any time during the previous year," it added.

As far as immunity under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 is concerned, the FAQs clarified that "where a declaration of an asset has been duly made under section 59 of the Act the provisions of section 51 will not be applicable in respect of that asset.

"Therefore, PMLA will not be applicable in respect of the scheduled offence of wilful attempt to evade tax under section 51 of the Act in respect of assets for which declaration is made under section 59 of the Act."