Trapped in symbolic Jayanti celebrations, Mahatma Gandhi’s legacy languished for years as a victim of mundane inanities. His valued ideals had to be rescued and smartly repackaged to be in sync with the contemporary world. It required an aesthetic mega tweak, a task accomplished with finesse by a unique live painting festival at the Rangoli Metro Art Centre on Thursday.

ADVERTISEMENTRefreshingly original, over 300 artists lined up to visualise the Father of the Nation in his multi-hued avatar. In a gathering billed as the country’s biggest live art show, they captured the essence of Gandhi and his time-tested principles. 

Dabbling in paint, brush on canvas, artists young and old imagined Gandhi beyond stereotypes. If Gandhi’s dramatic scene of death inspired one artist, it was the great man’s clarity of purpose that triggered another’s imagination. More Gandhis emerged in stark graphic design patterns, cleverly masked in multiple hues of modernity. 

Acrylic on canvas, water colours and charcoal on paper competed for space, as the artists dived deeper into the monumental markings of the Mahatma.

Artville, the festival organiser, had designed the show to push the boundaries of Gandhian representations. In Artville founder Roshan George’s words, the universal Gandhian ideals were relevant enough to be promoted in a public space. Bang in the city centre on MG Road, the Rangoli Centre provided exactly that.

 He explained, “We wanted to propagate his ideals in a big way by involving everyone. We see it as a creative way to celebrate and pay tributes to the Mahatma and his life.”

But Gandhi didn’t need to be on every work. In one telling instance of the man’s influence, wildlife artist Prasad Nataraja had an arresting image of a tiger’s vanatomy in three distinct parts. The first part in sepia told the past story of tigers hunted down to be shown off as trophies. The second had a deliberate feeling of the “present” when the species is endangered but not protected enough. The future was a neatly crafted image of the tiger’s vanishing tail. 

Moral progress

Connecting the dots, Nataraja reiterated a Gandhian thought, a compassionate yearning to protect animal life: “The greatness of a nation and its moral progress can be judged by the way its animals are treated.”

Seventy chosen works from the festival will be on display at Rangoli’s Vinyasa Gallery till Sunday, before the paintings are shifted to Artville’s gallery in Whitefield. 
DH News Service