Cultural capital Mysore is synonymous with heritage buildings, standing like a testimony to the past cultures. 

That’s what, ‘between Mysore and Mysooru’, has in it, bringing all such remains of the past to the present genre.

The exhibition of nearly 50 paintings from 30 artistes is underway at a modest house opposite to the main gate of Torchlight Parade grounds, on Nelson Mandela road in Bannimantap. 

Beginning with a painting of Ashoka road just a few years ago, in mixed media form of art, the aerial view of the buildings off Sayyaji Rao road, recreation of the stamp on clock tower (Doddagadiyaara), Free Mason’s Building opposite Town Hall, Chikkagadiyara (Dufferin Clock tower) among many others, all in the form of paintings from different media of artistes kindle and rekindle one’s interest. 

If you have a taste for arts, a dim lit room is sure to win you heart, for the handpicked paintings adorning the wall. The crumbling pillars with painting edging out in Seetavilasa Choultry on Chamaraja Double road, the dilapidated quarters of yesteryear’s elected representatives of local bodies on the premises of Nallappa Thana (Devaraja traffic police station) on Dewan’s road, posters on a good old building (meaning blot) on the road that leads to Jagan Mohan Palace, waste littered from the metal dust bins in front of an abandoned house, bungalow where the late Prof S Radhakrishnan, a teacher who went on to decorate highest civilian post of the nation as President, lived once have been brought alive on canvas here. ADVERTISEMENT
The frame of the window too has been covered with a thick sheet of paper making a perfect background for a painting. Abandoned jeep parked in front of an old house holds mirror to the artiste’s style of saying two things having equal meaning, in one frame. 
Kripakar-Senani duo, renowned wildlife photographers who were among the curious visitors told Deccan Herald, the way of arranging an exhibition itself is artistic, standing out of the box. 

Nostalgic tour

If you have time on Sunday, do make time, for the visit may take you on a nostalgic tour with bungalows in Lakshmipuram, equally old houses in police quarters,  all framed in paintings and having roots in the past waiting for you.

Mention must be made of Shoaib Chadkhan, a cloth merchant and also an artiste for converting the house in the posh locality as a gallery for the time being. 
The exhibition will remain open up to May 25 between 10.30 am and 7.30 pm.