The recent death of IT professional Satwik Shastri in an elephant attack in the Ragihalli forest range has put the spotlight back on man-animal conflicts in the Bannerghatta region. 

ADVERTISEMENTThough the forest officials claim that Satwik’s case was an aberration, subsequent incidents show that’s not the case.

A day after Shastri’s body was found in the forest, vigil was heightened. Forest guards found a young couple making out in the same area. They were let off after a warning. 

As recently as Friday, Chennaveerappa, a farmer from Ragihalli, was attacked by an elephant when he was grazing cattle in the forest. Mauled by a wild jumbo, he is now being treated for injuries in a private hospital.

Following Shastri’s death, the forest department had their work cut out. They increased vigil in the forest to prevent unauthorised entry. But three men took their cattle into the forest on Friday when one of them was attacked by the wild elephant. 

“There is no rain and this has prompted people in the fringe villages to take their cattle into the forest for grazing. The same is the problem with elephants. If we receive some rain, bamboo shoots and other plants grow. Without rain, there’s a drought-like condition in the forest where water sources have dried up. So, elephants tend to move towards the fringe villages,” explained a senior forest officer.

“There were no such elephant-related incidents in the past. There are about three herds in the forest and they have four calves. But encroachers do not know how to behave in the forest. They don’t respect wildlife and in a way interfere with ecology. This is why animals attack humans,” he says.

The forest department has taken up preventive measures, including heightened patrolling. “We have posted guards at all entry points. We let people into the forest area only after verification. The problem is, there are many villages down the forest and the same road is used by the villagers. We also plan to put up more signboards to alert people about the presence of elephants in the area,” said another official.

The National Park is now encircled by stone and granite quarries. The Ragihalli forest range, where Shastri was killed, is a three-sq km forest patch surrounded by busy roads on three sides and a noisy stone quarry on one side ,towards Jigani. The Anekal Main Road is dotted with granite units on either side, disturbing the wildlife. It also encourages commercial and residential activities in the area.

“We have brought it to the notice of the authorities concerned. A special task force to clear them was proposed some years ago, but it hasn’t materialised. They (the quarries) are a serious threat. But we are helpless, as they are situated outside the forest area and other authorities are not co-operating with us,” says a forest ranger.