We try our hand at fusion and will show you the reality and liberate you from illusions. We are clear and look forward to tomorrow with a vision,” says a page put up by Imagine Studios on Facebook. 

ADVERTISEMENT‘Imagine Studios’ is an initiative by two passionate youngsters — Noby Matthew and Athul Satheesh, students of Kristu Jayanti College —  who view the world through the camera with the belief that photography can foster awareness about social issues.

They believe that since ‘A photograph speaks a thousand words’ they can convey their message easily to people. Once they take the photographs, they post them online. Their pictures are used for awareness campaigns and in programmes organised by their college. A few photographs have been taken with the help of college students who have been used as models for the pictures.

 Though they work across genres in photography, social documentary photography is what they specialise in. It is a socially critical genre of photography that portrays the economic and social condition of an individual who is underprivileged and are at a disadvantage.

‘There are people in the world so hungry that god cannot appear to them except in the form of bread.’ is an interesting caption used for a photograph that is of a small boy who appears to be underprivileged and is holding on to a piece of bread offered to him. “We like to make a positive change in the society through photography, so we mostly take interest in pictures that concern societal issues,” says Athul Satheesh. “People are doing so many things for the society through campaigns and awareness programmes. This is a way to show others where exactly our country stands and to give them an imaginary view. 

Through my photographs, I want to help them by taking a step forward and seeing things through my third eye,” says Noby Matthew.

 Imagine Studios’ pictures have won many awards at college and inter-college fests in photography. They were exhibited and appreciated at a fest, called ‘Lumus’, organised by the department of humanities of Kristu Jayanti College. “Photographers these days focus on fashion or wildlife photography, it was really different and inspiring to see the photos taken by Imagine Studios that were thought provoking,” says Sameeksha Giridhar from Mount Carmel College. 

“I think it’s wonderful that Imagine Studios are making an effort to bring a positive vibe in the society through their photography. It’s a creative way to bring about awareness. They are just college students like me but have taken this passion of theirs and put it to good use that can inspire and benefit many,” says Godwin Paul while Noby adds, “We hope to become professionals someday.”