Heard of a ‘mynah’ taking a singing scooter ride, chasing cockroaches? It is straight out of a hot afternoon scene in the rural periphery of Bangalore, where the grass is not that green now, as it used to be.

ADVERTISEMENTBut for the Chennai-based A J Mithra, India’s only known zoo-musicologist yet, a 1.25 minutes melody he composed, blending classical Indian and Western styles as the background score for this striking animation piece of a scooter-driving ‘mynah’ in Bangalore’s outskirts, it is not just a leaf out of his creative endeavour to make music from bird calls — mynahs in this case — it also conveys a profound environmental message.

“In Bangalore, in recent times, we saw alot of mynahs were born with deformed legs due to environmental pollution; so I did this one song on a mynah going on a scooter to catch cockroaches.” Mithra told Deccan Herald in a deep-breath conversation at his very modest first-floor home in suburban Tambaram. This tune is now a popular hit on YouTube. Through this, Mithra is also telling his avid net-surfers that, ‘look, if what has happened to mynahs is not taken care of, we may lose another bird species’.”

Wildlife species “tend to take a cue from the background soundscape; be it the gushing of waters, rustling of leaves or the sound of air and so on, the same species can be heard singing in different pitch, based on the background sounds of the place from where it sings. This augurs well with not just birds, but also frogs and other animals, like how a musician uses a particular chord or shruthi to build a piece of music or a song,” mused Mithra on the inherent musicality of birds and other wildlife.

Beginning of something new

For the 53-year-old Mithra, this journey into zoo-musicology began four years back, in the Madras Christian College Campus Matriculation School, where he works as a music teacher. He went out looking for a “ringtone for my mobile”, when he first consciously noticed the “calls of birds living around us”. A self-effacing product of the Tamil Music College in Chennai, Mithra, though largely trained in Indian classical music, switched over to Western music, and experimented in fusion music, mainly to create and sustain an interest in music in his students.

But somewhere, there was a sudden quantum jump as it happens in all creative processes. Mithra’s sixth class children had to be given a ‘project in music’. So he divided the students into two groups, to collect bird songs from different places and put them in a power point presentation.

Even as they collated the bird sounds, downloading several from the Internet, Mithra too got into the act, taking permission for a famous ‘Bird call specialist’ in Canada, Dr Daniel Mennil, to use the recorded sounds of some Australian bird calls. “I wanted to do something different and composed my first bird song using natural bird calls,” recalled Mithra.

It was named ‘A Walk Through the Woods’, as Mithra played it to this correspondent on his desktop computer to which he is glued to when not in class teaching music. “I did it in two days, and then found that bird songs have a pitch, rhythm; I was amazed,” he exclaimed.

Another happy coincidence, as he surfed the net while recuperating at home from a road accident, was when he hit upon the famous ‘Cornell Lab of Ornithology’ in the US, the oldest lab that extensively documents bird sounds. Its world’s largest library has infinite ‘bird call recordings’. Even Hollywood producers lean on their resource, chuckles Mithra. “The background bird songs in Jurassic Park were shared by the Cornell Lab.”

Beginning to create more such musical pieces from bird sounds, Mithra drew inspiration from other distinguished people in the field like Dr Hollis Taylor, a world famous violinist who extensively studied the Australian Pied Butcher Bird. “I downloaded the sounds from her website and created music with sounds of some bird species. Very impressed, she baptised me ‘zoo-musicologist’,” he softly adds.

Mithra’s highly self-motivated and self-propelled work — he also records birds’ noises wherever he goes with a small recorder gifted by one of his students — found Cornell recognising him with a webpage named ‘Celebrate Urban Birds’.

More recently, in 2013, Mithra has entered the Limca Book of Records as the first zoo-musicologist of India to compose music using natural bird songs and animal calls. After Cornell’s great gesture, this is a moment of yet another quiet triumph for him.
Stepping from one composition to another, Nancy Landrum from Texas gave him apt ‘animation support’. “She died recently, and I miss her,” sighs Mithra, who recently did a song on the “importance of Frogs in India (vis-à-vis food security)”, inspired by India’s ‘Frogman’, S Biju.

Mithra excitedly narrated a discovery about crickets. “They are the poor man’s thermometer; count the total number of chirps it gives out in 15 seconds and add number 37 to it; that would give the closest day temperature of that day there.” Proof enough of zoo-musicology, still a fledgling discipline in India, being an indicator of “our Environmental status and also a weather reporter”. Nature is too subtle, Francis Bacon had said. Perhaps only zoo-music can decode it.