In an effort to promote and popularise the cause of saving the environment and use of renewable energy, the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) announced, in a press conference recently, that the Earth Hour, will be observed on March 23 from 8.30 to 9.30 pm. The Earth Hour is observed globally every year. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe theme, for this year is to switch off and switch on to renewable energy. Former Indian cricketer Venkatesh Prasad has joined hands with the WWF-India and pledged his support for the cause. 
Aarti Khosla, head of campaigns, WWF-India says, “I implore everyone to support the cause and like every year switch off the lights of their houses and offices on March 23 between 8.30 and 9.30 pm. Last year, 150 cities across the country, had switched off the lights and we had the highest number of on ground participation. We had people in small towns like Etawah in Uttar Pradesh, tying rakhi on the trees to show their support,” she says. Aarti adds, “This campaign is something which has brought people from various regions close as all of them, switch off the lights, to show their solidarity every year. In fact, last year we approached the authorities in Mysore and asked them to switch off the 9600 light bulbs that illuminate the Mysore Palace. They supported us and many youngsters came forward to support the cause.” 

Former Indian cricketer Venkatesh Prasad, informs that using renewable energy, is a great way to conserve energy. “Using solar water heaters and running your house on solar power can turn out be a little expensive, but in the long run, it helps in saving a lot of money. More than anything we can always switch to renewable energy by using gadgets that are less expensive. I strongly feel, that the young, should get more involved in the campaign,” he reasons. Some corporate companies  demonstrated the amount of savings they managed by switching off the lights every year. 

“We have been able to save 1.76 million units of power from the year we have started switching off the lights in our offices. This year, we have decided to light up 50 villages in Orissa, in Gajapati district with renewable energy,” informs Vinu Lal, the head of corporate Communications, ING Vysya bank.