The case has become complicated, with the June 3, 2009, order by Deputy Commissioner, Chamrajnagar, Manoj Kumar Meena, imposing a partial ban along the two stretches passing through Bandipur during the night between 9 pm to 6 am. The order under Section 115, Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and Karnataka Motor Vehicles Rules- 221- A (5) imposed a ban along the National Highway- 212 (Gundlupet-Ooty route in Tamil Nadu) and National Highway-67 (Gundlupet-Sultan Batheri route in Kerala). Two buses ferrying villagers on either side and ambulances which obtained prior permission were exempted from the ban.

Barely seven days after his first order, he lifted the ban through his another order dated 10 June, 2009. The DC’s second order lifting the ban was challenged by L Srinivasa Babu, a City based advocate in the High Court. Following this petition, the High Court on 27 July, 2009 stayed the order dated 10 June, 2009. The DC, through an order dated 1, August, 2009 ordered a ban and suggested two alternative routes for Ooty and Kalpetta.

He said that the existing route to Ooty could be replaced by another stretch between Mysore and Ooty via Sathy but this change in route would increase the distance by 78 kms. 

On the Kerala side he suggested the transport agencies, both public and private to use alternative route from Mysore via Ponnampet to reach Kalpetta, which is 38 kilometres more than the previous Mysore-Kalpetta route.

But in his Interlocutory Application (IA) 12 October, 2009, the DC sought to vacate the stay on his order dated 10 June and also sought to lift the ban.

Interestingly the DC in his IA stated that the ban would affect the emergency cases though in his Jun 3, 2009 order he had exempted ambulances and vehicles ferrying villagers of either side would be exempted.

The Petitioner, Babu, a party in person, in his submission has alleged that the DC Chamrajnagar has withdrawn the petition to satisfy the transporters, travellers  and contractors from Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Kerala.

Interestingly the petitioners P K Fravesh and eight others from Kerala challenging the ban, have submitted that DC, Chamrajnagar, withdrew the ban order dated June 10, 2009 following a memorandum by P Krishna Prasad, MLA Sultan Batheri and Assistant Transport Officer, Kerala State Road Transport Corporation (KSRTC).ADVERTISEMENT