To take pictures that are out of this world, the time and effort put into it will also have to be unearthly. At a time when amateurs are spending hours to take the perfect selfie, concepts like astrophotography are becoming popular among photography enthusiasts and they have no qualms about spending nights in the freezing outdoors for this. But as they entice people with dreamlike pictures of the skies and galaxies, an unexpected fallout is the environmental cost associated with the genre.

Navaneeth Unnikrishnan, an astrophotographer, explains the basics. “You have to ensure that you go to a dark place, far away from the city and around a time when it is not cloudy. You have to be patient, set up your tripod and let your camera do the remaining job,” he says.

A focus on less explored places has increased the pollution in such areas now. Arun Hegde, a photographer, says, “Spiti Valley is a good place for astrophotography. I’ve noticed a lot of people are interested in going there now. It’s not a bad thing but it’s important that they keep the environment clean so that people can stargaze in the future.”

He suggests that eco-friendly tours are a great option. “When I went to Spiti Valley, I packed light. I ensured I carried my waste back and did not litter,” he explains, adding that one also has to be mentally prepared for the challenges they will encounter at higher altitudes.

The situation is the same in wildlife photography as well. That’s why many wildlife photographers are making an attempt to educate the others to keep their travelling paths clean. Suhas Premkumar, a certified naturalist and eco-volunteer, says, “Whenever I plan a wildlife tour with interested photographers, I ensure I take them on a night road cruise where they can witness road kills. Many a time, you will see snakes run over by vehicles or injured in some other way. I encourage people to rescue them.”

He notes that it’s important to not disturb the environment just for a picture. “If you really want a picture of animals, capture them at their natural best. You have to understand that you are in their space, so respect their privacy.”

Talking about his personal contribution, Jishnu Babu, a wildlife photographer, says, “I make sure that I don’t carry plastic while entering the forest. And even if I do, I carry it back with me. Since I will be observing an animal for hours, it’s best that I blend in.”

He says that a common mistake many make during wildlife expeditions is to feed the animals. “You are changing their food habits; once you give them a snack, that’s all they will want the next time, which is why many monkeys snatch food packets from people,” he
adds.

So the next time you head out into the wild, make sure you take the right track. The photographers are doing their bit and the cycle completes when other enthusiasts too pitch in.