Now, tongue tingler to tackle snoring

ADVERTISEMENTFed up of your partner’s snoring that keeps you up all night? A new tongue tingler may be the answer to all your prayers.

During each breath, the device sends a pulse of energy to a nerve in the throat. This then stimulates a muscle in the tongue, which helps to keep the ­airway open during sleep.

Partial blockage results in snoring but with sleep apnoea the airway closes completely and patients can stop breathing for up to ten seconds at a time. This lack of air causes the muscles to contract and open up the windpipe. The sufferer then takes in a big gulp of air, hence the snore. This cycle may be repeated hundreds of times a night.

The system, developed by the US-based company Apnex, targets the nerve which controls the a muscle in the tongue. It is this muscle that collapses in sleep apnoea. By stimulating the nerve, it stiffens the muscle, stopping this collapse.

“In most patients, it reduced the severity of their sleep apnoea, allowing them to sleep better and feel better,” said Dr Peter Eastwood, West Australian Sleep Disorders Research Institute. However, scientists are looking to conduct further trials to really confirm the efficacy of the device.

Growing number of Cambodia vultures offers hope

While vultures across Asia are on the verge of extinction, the vultures of Cambodia are apparently increasing in number, providing a beacon of hope for these threatened scavengers, say experts.

According to Wildlife Conservation Society and other members of the Cambodia Vulture Conservation Project the record numbers of vultures have been counted in Cambodia’s annual vulture census, with 296 birds of three species found at multiple sites across the Northern and Eastern Plains of Cambodia.

The record count means that Cambodia is home to the only increasing population of vultures in Asia.

Specifically, the census indicates that the country’s population of white-rumped vultures is increasing; populations of red-headed and slender billed vultures were found to be stable.

The World Conservation Union has listed all three of Cambodia’s vulture species as ‘critically endangered’. The census success follows a record breeding season for vultures in Cambodia. This year, a total of 36 vulture chicks fledged from colonies across the north and east of the country, an increase from last year’s total of 19 chicks.

Now, a plastic that can heal itself

It seems that a chemistry team in the US has found the key to producing a plastic that can heal itself.

Graduate student Jeremy Lenhardt was apparently testing the limits of polymers — molecules that form the basis for materials in our daily lives such as silicon, rubber and neoprene — in the chemistry lab at Duke University in North Carolina.

He happened to stumble across one particular species polymers, which contained ring-shaped molecules called gem-difluorocyclopropanes, and when stretched, remained in that state for much longer than expected, before shrinking back to even smaller rings.
“To come across this discovery was a bit like having Christmas in July. And then August. And then September,” said Lenhardt.

“I ran up to his (colleague Stephen Craig) office (and said) ‘Steve, something funny is going on here. Look at this!’” he added.