Inter-galactic battle

ADVERTISEMENTThe Fantastic Four are back — with a bang! With Von Doom back in his homeland of Latveria, the awesome foursome have new troubles: Galactus has decided that Earth is his next target and is taking steps to destroy the planet altogether. 

When his henchman, The Silver Surfer, is sent to Earth, he discovers that he's getting more than he bargained for when he encounters the Fantastic Four. On the other hand, his whacky power-changing abilities are creating a lot of inconvenience for the superheroes.

 But that's not all — Dr. Doom decides that after two years in the homeland he is ready to return, causing even more tension for the awesome foursome. Catch ‘Fantastic Four: The Rise of the Silver Surfer’ on June 20 at 9 pm on Star Movies. 


A dance extravaganza indeed

Fans of the popular dance show, Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa, are in for a real treat.

This time, the show is going to step beyond previously-set boundaries and take the passion for dance to a whole new level. The show will include oodles of salsa, bhangra, cha-cha and even lavani — judged by three of the most-loved members of tinsel town: Madhuri Dixit, Karan Johar and Remo D’Souza. 

In this season, the contestants will take on new performances, like dancing to a live band, paying tribute to the century of Indian cinema and pairing up with international dancers — from the reality show ‘Dancing with the Stars’. 

There will also be a session called ‘Madhuri Dixit’s Step of the Week’, in which the dancing diva adopts a futuristic avatar and grooves to international dance forms like the salsa and samba. 

The contestants include cricketer Sanath Jayasuriya, with choreographer Suchitra;  child artiste Darsheel Safari, who’ll twirl on the dance floor with pint-sized Avneet Kaur; Ravi Kishan, with choreographer Kunjan; singer Talat Aziz, with choreographer Ankita Maity; Pratyusha Banerjee aka Anandi, with choreographer Deepak; Giaa Manek, with choreographer Nishant Bhat; Gurmeet Choudhary, with choreographer Shampa Sonathalia; stand-up comedian Bharti Singh, with choreographer Savio Barnes; Isha Sharvani, with choreographer Salman; singer Shibani Dandekar, with choreographer Punit; TV anchor Archna Vijaya, with choreographer Sanam Johar and TV and theatre actor Jayati Bhatia, with choreographer Diwakar. A 13th contestant will add fuel to the fire. 

Mystery from the past

Set in the dangerous world of second-century Britain, ‘The Eagle’ is an adventurous flick that stars Channing Tatum, Jamie Bell and Donald Sutherland. Twenty years after the unexplained disappearance of the entire Ninth Legion in the mountains of Scotland, young centurion Marcus Aquila arrives from Rome to solve the mystery and restore the reputation of his father, the commander of the Ninth. Catch this flick on June 20 at 9 pm on HBO.

Food fights and tension

Two and a Half Men’ airs on June 20 at 11 pm on Star World. 

A freak food-flinging accident leaves Alan with impaired vision, which doesn't bode well especially when he draws a liking to one of Charlie's ex-girlfriends. 

Tensions are created between the two brothers — as always. How does this incident get resolved? Tune in to the witty, fairly cheeky show to find out.

Addicted to animals

Animal enthusiasts are in for a treat — ‘Dick and Dom Gone Wild’ airs on Discovery Kids on June 20 ar 3.30 pm. Will Dick and Dom change the minds of animal volunteers in looking after wounded wildlife and pets?

 Join them as they have for their hands on exclusive backstage passes for some of the UK’s busiest vets, wildlife hospitals and animal sanctuaries. But their victims — animal volunteers — aren’t all animal lovers! Tune in as they rise to the challenge of helping animals in need.

An elaborate ploy

Amrit Manthan is an emotional story of two sisters who are worlds apart and can’t see eye-to-eye on anything. Despite their contrasting personalities, they have to work out the kinks in their relationship. 

In tonight’s episode, Amrit somehow comes to know that Sunita was, in fact, faking her so-called illness. Apparently, it Sunita and Tej had cooked up an elaborate ploy to prevent Agam and Nimrit from making a big mistake and getting a divorce.

 They wanted to bring the two closer together. Will Sunita succeed? Tune in to the show on June 20 at 8.30 pm on Life OK to find out.

(TV SHOW TIMINGS ARE SUBJECT TO CHANGE)