Even though Ganesha Chathurthi is far away, on September 19, the idols are getting ready well in advance. They have started giving darshan to devotees in Mysore city – not in full form though, finds out T R Sathish Kumar

ADVERTISEMENTHuge Ganeshas have been lined up at the signal near Kalamandira on Hunsur road in the city. A family, headed by Bana Ram, from Pali in Rajasthan has made the vacant site near the railway bridge opposite CFTRI gate and parallel to Kalamandira home for over 20 years. 

The family has been making decorative and spiritual idols with plaster of Paris (PoP) for the past two decades. The family, which started as a small group two decades ago, has now swollen into a 50-member strong unit. 

Second generation members have joined the trade and some of the family members have joined them from Rajasthan. The trade has been sustaining the family well. 
Babu Lal, son of Bana Ram, said there were around 20 children in the family and they study at the Government Sindhi School in Nazarbad. 

The family has been making idols of Ganesha – from two feet to eight feet tall for the past three years. They are not aware of the effects of PoP and chemical paints, they use to make idols, on the environment and thus on human beings, cattle, wildlife, flora and fauna. They only see a livelihood in it.

The idols are made with PoP and coir stuffed into moulds. For huge idols, two halves are made separately and then joined. The idols are hollow and hence lightweight. So, it is easy to handle them. After the idol is made, it is coloured with paint and ready for sale. 
Babu Lal said: “It is difficult to meet the demands of the people once the festival season sets in, so we have started work early. It is due to our experiences in the past that we do it early.”

Fixing price

He said, when it is festival time, the idols can be sold peacefully. All idols would be exhibited neatly and devotees only have to select a piece -- depending on size, design, and colour. “The price of the idols would be fixed at the time of selling, depending upon the prevailing market prices and demand. However, our idols are affordable and priced below market rates,” he adds.

“We do not have any labourers. All are family members. Everybody works according to their skills and capacity. We cook together, eat together and share the profits. Everybody gets an opportunity to go to our native place in Rajasthan once in a year or depending on their needs,” says Babu Lal. 

When asked what if the district administration or the city corporation bans the sale of PoP idols, he says he is clueless about the issue.