An injured wild elephant with minimal vision has grabbed the attention of many animal lovers across the state. The elephant fondly called Sidda by forest guards has been battling for his life near the Manchanabele dam in Magadi taluk of Ramanagaram district for the past 63 days.  

ADVERTISEMENTOn Tuesday, the guards were trying to calm down the agitated elephant during the day’s medical intervention.  But Sidda, the usually calm elephant was irritated after the vets inserted an intravenous (IV) fluid pipe into one of his ears. 

Sidda, who is already in deep pain was trying to pull out the IV fluid pipe with his trunk. And, the animal-keepers were luring him with sugarcane to keep his trunk away from the IV pipes.  

Sidda’s deep breath, wounds on his body, puss oozing out from his right fore leg, tears in his eye, bring out his pain. He can only hear the voices of the people around him as the little vision left in his left eye is also blocked. Vets treating him say that though Sidda is a wild elephant, he is co-operating with the treatment. Ganapathi Homa was conducted on Tuesday, praying for his speedy recovery.

Sidda has turned into a major tourist attraction. People from different parts of the state are visiting the injured elephant and are bringing fruits, maize, sugarcane, coconuts and grass to feed the jumbo.  A woman, who had come with repellant spray to keep the flies and insects away from Sidda said she could not do anything more. Another woman from Mysuru suggested creating a support system to make  Sidda stand on his feet. According to one of the vets, an acupuncture specialist from Shivamogga wanted to try his healing methods on Sidda to remove the puss accumulated in his leg. However, he was denied permission.

Doctors’ dilemma

According to sources, experts are divided on continuing treatment to Sidda. 
The elephant did not get any treatment during the initial days of his injury due to ‘apathy’ of government officials.  Following public pressure, senior forest officials are now visiting the injured elephant to ensure treatment for him.

Sidda was injured after he fell into a trench at Kollur village on August 29 while he was driven by the forest guards for nearly 15 km, to ensure that he does not attack any locals. After having walked 15 km with a broken leg, Sidda entered the waters of Manchanabele dam and refused to come out until he was lured with food. After constant efforts, he was brought out of the waters and is under treatment since October 21. 

Sources said that when there was a requirement of Kumki elephants, the officials refused them citing Dasara as the reason.  Later, a committee was constituted to handle Sidda’s case. Now, the committee members have conflicting ideas on treating the animal. The decision to rope in experts was taken after 55 days and many experts have concluded that Sidda has suffered a major fracture in his leg and his survival chances are minimal.

Four wildlife vets, including Dr Arun A Sha and his team from Wildlife SOS are treating Sidda round-the-clock  Sha has been trying to get an X-ray image of Sidda’s injured leg and has not been successful in getting a specific image. He says he is unable to see any fracture and this might be due to excess puss accumulation.