Three new elephants, attached to the Mattigodu elephant camp in Nagarahole Tiger Reserve, have been selected to take part in this year’s jamboo savari. The Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (PCCF) has approved the participation of 17-year-old Bheema, Krishna, 56, and Drona 35.

It may be mentioned that the Forest officials had selected Bheema in 2015 for the Dasara celebrations, but as the celebration was a low-key affair, he was dropped from the team. Bheema, a friendly jumbo, was captured when he was two years old at Bheemanakatte in Nagarahole Tiger Reserve.

Krishna was captured in a ‘khedda’ operation in Kelahalli forest in 1970. He has played a prominent role in capturing rogue elephants, which were ruining crops and lives in villages. Krishna was a 9-year-old elephant when he was captured.

Drona was captured at Madalli forest under Hesaluru Forest Range in Hassan division. He was often used in operations to solve human and wild animal conflicts.

Deputy Conservator of Forests (DCF) (Wildlife) V Yedukondalu told DH all the three elephants were good performers on the field and their performance in Dasara needs to be checked. 

“For the first time, they will be brought to Mysuru to participate in Dasara celebrations. All the elephants will be trained along with regular Dasara jumbos Arjuna, Balarama, and Gajendra. If they perform well, they will take part in the Jamboo Savari on Vijayadashami,” said Yedukondalu.

15 elephants approved
The PCCF has approved a list of 15 elephants out of the 16 proposed. Sarala, a female elephant, which had participated in the Jamboo Savari 13 times before 2013, has been dropped owing to age factor. Sarala is 76 years old. As per the guidelines of the Ministry of Environment and Forests, elephants aged above 65 are not supposed to be used for any hard work, said the DCF.

Though Sarala was dropped from Dasara, two years back, the Forest department had sent a proposal to the higher-ups for her participation in Dasara as she is physically fit. Sarala had played the role of ‘kumki’ for former lead elephant Balarama in the Vijayadashami procession.ADVERTISEMENT