Heartwork Tattoo Festival (HTF) is back with its second edition, commencing December 2. While tattoo lovers must have been ready with the designs they want on their body canvas, there must be some who are still in search of the latest trends. So, Metrolife talked to some of the participating artistes and organisers of the festival to share popular designs and trends for this season. 

ADVERTISEMENTLokesh Verma, co-organiser HTF, says, “I think this year geometrical designs and freestyle art is going to grab a lot of attention. International tattoo designs like Dark Biomech; clouded and black and grey realism are other designs that will attract a lot of people.” The festival will have over 100 participants, comprising experts from countries like UK, Russia and Spain. So if you are looking for some interesting international design, you know where to head to.

Mickey Malani ,co-founder, BodyCanvas Tattoos and a participant at HTF, says, “Not everyone has a reason to get inked. Many people get tattoos as style statement or just for taking chances, like a dare or a challenge or just trying something you have never done before. In that case, we will see a lot of abstract tattoos and water colour styles — some can be done so minimalistic that it looks like one is wearing a jewellery or accessory.”

As per gender preference, “women are likely to go for geometry and mandala tattoos and some fusion art work like contemporary style, abstract and water colour.” 

Whereas, “men have started exploring portraits of character from Hollywood or Bollywood movies, some of the best real portrait shots that become popular in the mainstream and also from mythology around the world (Greece, Egyptian, Japanese and Chinese).” He adds that men also opt for Indian mythological characters but more in neo-fantasy style. New avatar of Indian god and goddess combined with some geometry and abstract art work, wildlife tattoos it’s all out there,” adds Malani.

Tattoo trends also changes with age, says Sameer Patange. “Teenagers  and youngsters in their early 20s get influenced by what’s trending on social media, follow celebrities. People in late 20s to late 30s usually put some thought into their designs which are often personal.” The designs are based on their stories and experiences of life, family, achievements and ambitions.

And when it comes to colour,  Patange believes depending on the Indian skin brown, black and grey is always the first preference. But for those who have a fair complexion,  there are number of choices to pick from like red, magenta and orange.