Art and craft 

ADVERTISEMENTAndhra Pradesh Government is hosting an exhibition of Andhra Handicrafts and Handlooms at Sreenivasa Kalyana Mandapam, near Ashoka Pillar in Jayanagar till September 12 from 10 am to 9 pm. 

The crafts on display include: pochampalli tie and dye dress material and bedsheets in addition to Mangalagiri dress materials and saris, Gadwal sari, Venkatagiri cotton saris, Narayanapeta cotton saris, Hyderabad printed cotton saris. There are also  a variety of bedsheets, pillow covers, bags and toys. 

Theatre festival 

Rangasiri is organising its annual theatre festival under the banner of Haththaralli Yentu, where Yentu (eight) refers to Rangasiri's age and Haththaralli (in ten) implies the year 2010.

The organisation encourages the young to participate in theatre. It also acknowledges the work done by others toward kindling interest in theatre. Rangasiri has been active in and around Malleswaram and Rajajinagar. The festival is from September 3 to 5. 

There will be three plays everyday. Kannada play Dangeya Munchina Dinagalu will be staged on the first day, Mahimapura on the second and Pramanavembudu Pramanave on the concluding day. 

Dangeya Munchina Dinagalu and Mahimapura are written by Prasanna and Pramanavembuda Pramanave is the Kannada version of Shakespeare's Measure for Measure, translated into Kannada by K V Akshara. All the plays will be staged at Seva Sadan, Malleswaram 15th Cross at 6.30 pm.

Bangaloreans awarded 

This year’s Askary Awards 2010 (State Youth Photography Awards) goes to two Bangaloreans— Akshay Harith and Ramu M. 

Akshay is a class ten student and Ramu works as layout artist at the Deccan Herald. Askary Awards, instituted in 1997, have been awarding young photographers below the age of 35 years from the State for their meritorious photography skills. Both Akshay and Ramu turned in images on nature and wildlife. 

The applicants were asked to submit a set of four prints on any theme of their choice in monochrome or colour. There were 27 entries received from across the State. The award comprises a cash award, membership to the Youth Photographic Society and a crystal 
trophy. The award ceremony is on September 6 at State Youth Centre, Nrupathunga Road.

Violin recital 

Sri Shankara Cancer Foundation is organising a classical carnatic violin recital by Dr L Subramaniam at Jnana Jyothi auditorium at 6 pm, on September 4.