The district has successfully implemented the Forest Rights Act in the state, benefiting hundreds of people belonging to the Soliga and Jenu Kuruba community living in tribal hamlets in the forests. 

ADVERTISEMENTProper coordination between the department of Forests, SC/ST Welfare department and District Tribal Development Society ensured success.  

According to sources, 3,167.69 acres of forest land has been approved and 1,915 title deeds have been distributed among tribal families. In all, 25 community title deeds have also been distributed. Only 105 applications are pending and even that would be distributed by the District Forest Rights Committee soon with survey works in progress.

Tribal hamlets

The district comprises Bandipur National Park, Biligiri Ranganathaswamy Temple Tiger Reserve, Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary and Male Mahadeshwara Wildlife Sanctuary. In all, there are 2.75 lakh hectares of forests with 148 tribal hamlets. Around 50% of the hamlets are situated in the deep forests. It is mandatory for applicants to submit proof that they have lived in the forests since three to get the title deed. No one from any community applied for this, since, unlike tribals, they found it difficult to provide proof.

According to the community rights certificate issued to them, tribals living there have permission to collect forest products, fish in lakes, graze cattle and sheep inside the forests. In addition, they are also given the responsibility of maintaining and protecting forests.
Till now, no title deeds were distributed at tiger reserves. For the first time, tribals living in BRT reserve have been given the rights to stay.

Rejected

About 274 families living on the fringes at Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary near Gopinatham, Kollegal taluk, had applied for title deeds. The committee had rejected all the applications as they did not provide proper evidence. C Madegowda, member of the committee told DH the beneficiaries included 18 people belonging to Jenu Kuruba community, while the others are Soligas. 

B P Ravi, Chief Conservator of Forest, Chamarajanagar Circle said, “There are a large number of tribals living in the forests in the district. With 70% benefiting from the successful implementation of the Act, 60 families are yet to get the deeds.”

Saraswathi, district SC/ST Welfare Officer said, “Only 105 applications are pending. The committee has already approved 45 applications. Survey works are in progress related to other applications and title deeds would be distributed soon.”