When she was a little girl, Sowmya Mense dream of becoming a doctor, but she graduated in commerce and took up an IT job. It was only after eight years, through a “sweet accident” as she likes to describe it that she found her calling — wedding photography. In a chat with Chetana Divya Vasudev, she talks about this journey and how the camera transformed her life.

When did you first become fascinated with the camera?
When I was in class six, my parents got an old Hot Shot camera but my mother wouldn’t let us handle it because that was the era of the negatives and it’s very easy to spoil them.

Did you dream of becoming a photographer then?
Not really. As a child, I wanted to become a doctor. But as grew older, I saw my brother’s big books — he’s a doctor — and felt light-headed. So I pursued commerce instead.

When did you become a shutterbug?
Photography, for me, started off as a hobby. In 2007, when I was working as a logistics executive at a software firm, I got a point-and-shoot camera. I began experimenting, clicking whatever frames I saw around me — wildlife, people, abstracts. A few months later, without any training in photography, I also bought a DSLR.

Your wedding photography pictures are popular on Facebook...
That happened by a sweet accident. After eight years in my IT job, I wanted a break. So I quit and even attended another job interview then. The person conducting the interview was also into photography and he suggested I take this my hobby up more seriously. Around that time, I clicked pictures for a friend’s wedding and put some images up on the social media. And I started getting clients.

Why this genre?
I feel that weddings have everything that I love — such varied people, emotions and drama. Generally, there’s also plenty of natural light, which I really enjoy working with.

What other pictures do you enjoy capturing?
My current obsession is my two-year-old son. I know when to anticipate his special moments. I want to document these myself — I want each picture to tell a story, to be something that would mean something to him after he grows up. I also love doing lifestyle and bay shoots.

What would you have been if not a photographer?
I’m really glad I found a creative avenue in photography. If I hadn’t, perhaps I’d have been a dreamer or a traveller with an IT job.

Do you have any other hobbies?
Yes, I love creating something out of waste. Not a box or cover or bottle do I throw away. Making a butterfly cut out from a sheet of plastic and hanging it out in the garden or painting a glass bottle works as a great stress buster for me. So there’s a lot of waste in my house.

Your inspiration?
Everyday sights. I always see frames that I would like to click, so during my shoots, I try to recall and achieve them.

What camera do you currently use?
I own a Cannon 5D Mark III.