Bandipur beckons all wildlife enthusiasts

ADVERTISEMENTBandipur National Park is a perfect destination for an unusual off- the- beaten track holiday. This verdant jewel has the distinction of being one of the best known national parks in India and a beautiful wildlife sanctuary in our State. The well-preserved reserve occupying the rainy shadows of the Western Ghats has been a treasure trove of wildlife. In the early 30s, a 60-sq-km sanctuary was first created which was later enlarged with the creation of Venugopal Wildlife Park in 1941. Now this national park occupies 690 sq km of the total area and constitutes 335 sq km of the core area. Bandipur is flanked by Nagarahole National Park in the north, Tamil Nadu’s Madhumalai sanctuary in the south and Kerala’s Wyanad sanctuary in the west.

The landscapes sport a multitude of mammals and birds and the forest reverberates with their sounds. At any time, a few barasinghas, deer and sambhar can be spotted, providing a pretty picture for your camera.

Common sightings

Some of the common mammals found here are monkeys, langur, wild buffaloes, elephants and wild dogs. The herbivores found in this tract are chital, chousingha, gaur, wild boar, elephant, black hare, sloth, bonnet and giant squirrel. Tiger, jungle cat, common mongoose and striped neck mongoose are the main carnivores. A multitude of reptiles like crocodiles, snakes and lizards can also be encountered while on safari. The reserve also boasts a scavenging contingent in the form of jackals and hyenas.

The bird life in the national park is varied and rich. Many varieties of perching, high-flying, nocturnal, pretty birds and singing birds are found here. Birds which can be commonly seen are peacocks, jungle fowl, pigeon, bee eaters, kingfishers, partridge, crow, cuckoo, vulture, laughing thrush, woodpeckers and teals. 

Bandipur National Park is known for its dense forests. Sagoon forests form a lush green backdrop coupled with forests of bamboo and teak.  The unspoiled wilderness of the reserve is manifest in the profusion of smaller plants and abundant creepers spanning the space between the trees.

The rich flora and fauna of this region present the ideal getaway for nature lovers and wildlife photographers. The landscape is slightly hilly, beset with rivers and gorges. The river Nagu flows right through the national park while the river Kabini flows along the north and west boundaries of the national reserve forest.