Bangalore will host a national and international nature and wildlife photography competitions.

ADVERTISEMENTThe 17th edition of the Nature Biennial World Cup will be organised by Federation of Indian Photography (FIP) as part of the global Federation Internationale de l’Art Photographique, former additional principal chief conservator of forests and chairman of FIP, M N Jayakumar, told media persons here on Saturday.

This is the second time the competition is being held in Bangalore; the last was in 2010.Over the years, India has earned the reputation of topping in nature and wildlife photography, he said.

“Over 1,000 print and projected image applications from 25 countries have been received. The images will be judged on October 29 and 30 and the results will be announced on October 31. 

The photographs and images will be judged by a three-member jury of Ioannis Lykouris from Greece, Jill Sneesby from South Africa and B Srinivasa from India. There will also be an open session where the jury will showcase their photographs and interact with others through a workshop,” Jayakumar said.

The print and projected images will be judged for their technical and artistic merits such as subject, composition, lighting, sharpness, background, coherence and story-telling features. While each country has the liberty of choosing their theme, in case of Indian participants, the theme chosen is ‘Mammals in Action’ under the print category, and ‘Birds in Action’ under the images category.

Showcasing Karnataka

Apart from this, FIP, in co-ordination with the Karnataka State Tourism Department, will host a national-level photography contest with the aim of showcasing Karnataka as an incredible tourism destination. 

FIP Joint Secretary C R Sathyanarayana said such a competition was being held for the first time, the theme being nature, wildlife, heritage, culture and monuments. Any citizen from the country, who has taken a photograph of Karnataka, can participate in the competition.

 The event will be inaugurated by Additional Chief Secretary, Tourism Department, Arvind Jadhav, on October 29. The last date for receiving applications under this category is November 10 and the results will be announced in December.

The photographs of both the competitions will be exhibited at Karnataka Chitrakala Parishath from December 1- 7.