The tiger was just ten and strong and would have survived for at least another five years in the wild. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe only mistake he did was to stray from his territory and move closer to 
human habitat in search of his prey. He created a scare and also provided an 
opportunity for  people on the fringe of Wayanad Wildlife Sanctuary, who were already up in arms over a rumour that a tiger reserve was coming up soon. He killed a couple of animals, before falling to the bullets of forest department staff. 

The above incident occurred a few days ago in a human settlement on the fringe of Wayanad Wildlife Sanctuary. It was not an animal and human conflict, but a victim of the state’s outdated forest management, vote bank politics and mafia rule. It has raised an uproar, understandably so with the wildlife lovers raising a concern over dwindling tiger population in India.

Forest officials and wildlife experts warn that unless the government wakes up from its slumber and addresses the core issues on a war footing,  a better patch of forest will become a thing of past. They fear that the “Wayanad incident” will become a precedent. This might encourage others to use force to kill wild animals straying to human settlements, bowing to public pressure.

Like in most issues in Kerala, politicians jumped on the bandwagon, with parties trying to score brownie points. Even villagers sensed that it was time to reap it rich. They made false claims and got compensation. They were paid without many questions asked as the authorities were under tremendous pressure.  

The area is “conducive” for re-enacting the “tiger drama”. A recent camera trap survey found that the 344.44 sq km sanctuary is the home to 67 adult tigers and 11 cubs. And big cats in  bordering Bandipur and Nagarhole tiger reserves frequent the sanctuary, especially during summer in search of food and water.

The Wayanad-Bandipur-Nagarhole stretch together accommodates over 200 tigers. As it is a small area, territorial fights among tigers are common and older and weaker ones, prefer to move to fringes as they find it difficult to fight with younger ones. Naturally,  old and injured ones  move to the nearby human settlements in search of easy food. 

“In fact, it is the existing scenario. A tacit harmony has been existing between the local population and wild animals prowling in their settlements. The people are satisfied with the compensation provided by the Forest Department for their loss. Not a single incident of tiger attack on a human was reported in the past 25 years from the area and for that matter anywhere from the state,” points out 
Dr P S Easa, a wildlife behavioural expert and a member of National Tiger Conservation Authority.

The rumour that the sanctuary will be declared a tiger reserve has been fuelling the animosity of the people against the Forest Department. They apprehend that the proposed tiger reserve will lead to restrictions on farming and movement. 
The inept answering of an RTI query added fuel to the fire. The question was about the progress in converting the sanctuary into a tiger reserve. Without referring  records, the officer answered “it is progressing well.”

Campaigners, political parties, Christian priests and media fanned it out to a mass hysteria. Villagers en masse took out to streets with  carcasses of their animals, demanding protection and repealing of proposal for tiger reserve. Some schools, mostly run by churches, encouraged their students to join the stir.

Chief Wildlife Warden V Gopinathan clarified that there was no proposal for a tiger reserve, but it was too late and irreparable damage had been done.

The motley crowd led to the bloody end of the tiger. It followed the task force tracking the animal. 

Hit by the a tranquiliser shot, it jumped on the crowd. To avert human casualty, it had to be shot dead. “But for the crowd, we could have at least made an attempt to capture it alive,” bemoaned chief forest conservator (wildlife), Palakkad, O P  Kaler.