He has been working in the food industry for the past 17 years but this hasn’t stopped him from  doing what he loves best — being in the lap of nature and exploring everything about it.  Mohammad Yasir captures  wildlife with his camera whenever he finds time. 

ADVERTISEMENTHe says, “I was always interested in nature. And being from a small place like Aligarh, it was easier to find many small places to go to and spend time in the wild. My father is a retired professor of Botany, so that was another reason for me to grow up in the company of plants and animals.” 

He is solely into wildlife photography and says his motive is to show the beauty of the wild, and present it to people who would probably never get a chance to go to these places. Translating the feeling and the story of what was happening at that moment is something he looks forward to. “It is all about the right action at the right moment, a photographer has to be sharp and sound to get the settings right. My aim is to encourage today’s generation to love nature and do their bit to preserve it,” he says. Initially when he started clicking pictures, it was a routine affair till he met a few conservationists who changed the way he looked at wildlife photography. He explains, “With time, I became more passionate about photography. My encounter with a few people who worked towards preserving nature and wildlife taught me how fragile our eco-system is and what we should do to save it.” 

One of his fascinating clicks is where a tiger makes a kill in the water which he says is probably a moment all photographers would look for. Though he agrees that a picture can be edited, he says that if one messes up with the light or the angle, there is no second chance. 

He explains that one has to be persevering in this field. The first click of his he recalls, was that of a peacock dancing in the middle of the road. “That image was a stepping stone. I had something which was so beautiful. After that, I started going for early morning trips, slowly graduated to better equipment and became more technically sound,” he adds.  Some of his works were selected by a wildlife magazine a couple of years back, which he says was the biggest achievement. “The first image that they selected was a dolphin jumping in the air, second one was of a tiger running and the third was the image of a crocodile and a fishing cat. The dolphin image was also a part of the WWF calender 2014. This one was one of the most difficult shots till now,” he says.