The growing number of endangered species has led to the development of a unique course to help vets tackle this global challenge.

ADVERTISEMENTThe Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies, UK, has appointed Anna Meredith as professor of Zoological and Conservation Medicine to teach students of Veterinary Science, Zoology and Biology how to save a dying species.

Professor Meredith, who joined the School in 1992 and was instrumental in setting up its Exotic Animal and Wildlife Service, is heading a MVetSci in Conservation Medicine at the university.

The course is aimed at international vets, enabling them to study  part-time through online learning and earn a certificate, Diploma or Master’s degree over one, two or three years

The first intake of students, which starts in September will see vets from Cyprus, France, India, North America, Rwanda, Turkey and the UK collaborating and researching under the guidance of Prof. Meredith.

She said: “Conservation medicine needs biologists, ecologists, public health specialists and vets to work together, but while a lot of vets are keen to become involved, there is limited training in this area. This is why we wanted to run such a course that could be accessed by vets from all over the world.

“Animal health and human health are inextricably linked, and human behaviour has a major impact on many different species. Vets have an important role to play in wildlife conservation, which needs not only a holistic but also an interdisciplinary approach, by considering ecological health and ecosystem interaction.”

She is also involved in research and surveillance related to the conservation of Red Squirrels and Scottish Wildcats. She also chairs the UK Government’s Zoos Expert Committee.

Out of more than 63,000 species, including plants, birds, fish, mammals and amphibians, nearly 20,000 are endangered or critically endangered, thanks to climate change and habitat destruction as major causes.

This includes the melting of sea ice, which affects the fate of polar bears dependent on the ice as a floating platform to catch prey. 

Rising sea levels are also affecting sea turtles in Brazil, which lay their eggs on beaches. The Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies’ Exotic Animal and Wildlife Service, which has 10 staff members,  is unique in how wildlife and exotic medicine are fully integrated into its service and its curriculum for undergraduate vets.

More information on the online MVetSci in conservation medicine can be found at: www.ed.ac.uk/vet/conservation-medicine