Sri Chamarajendra Zoological Gardens, popularly known as Mysore Zoo, has adopted new techniques in providing treatment to injured tigers.

ADVERTISEMENTA four-year-old tigress was rescued on December 4, after it was trapped in a barbed wire fence at Kanuru village, in Virajpet taluk of Kodagu district. As the wild cat had sustained injuries on her left forelimb with mild lacerations and punctured wounds, it was sedated and brought to the Mysore zoo.

Keeping in mind the past experiences in treating injured tigers, the Zoo authorities 
are  treating the four-year-old by adopting improvised methods. The tigress has been kept in isolation at the zoo hospital. Only doctors and a keeper wearing “gown for camouflage effect to reduce human imprints” are allowed to treat and monitor her. Besides, the tigress is being monitored round the clock with the help of a CCTV camera.

A press release from the executive director of the zoo stated that animal keeper Bhaskar has improvised on the medical advice “as approaching the tigress on crouching is preferable.’ The tigress is being treated by zoo doctors led by assistant director Dr Suresh and Dr Prashant. 

The animal keeper approaches the tigress, wearing gown, by crawling on the ground and with ease he sprays antiseptic on the wound the big cat sustained on its left forelimb. These experiences and skills gained in treating the injured tigers and panthers will come in handy at the proposed Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre at Koorgalli. Among all the animals, it is said that felids (lithe-bodied round-headed fissiped mammals with retractile claws) are difficult to be rehabilitated and, can be released in their habitat only after the completion of treatment.

After the tigress was brought here, it was sedated the following day itself. The left forelimb was radiographed and no skeletal deformities were observed. Only soft tissue swelling could be noted in its forearm. The wounds were dressed and necessary medication like long-acting antibiotics, anti-inflammatory drugs and Tetvac were administered. The animal was revived using Reverzine and the recovery was uneventful, the release said. 

Earlier, four rescued tigers from Nagarahole Tiger Reserve were treated at the zoo here. On August 8, 2012, a male tiger aged 12 years was rescued near Metikuppe range in H D Kote taluk. It was treated and sent to rescue centre at Banneraghatta. Another male tiger aged between 12 and 14 years was rescued at Anechowkur range and brought to the zoo on October 20. 

However, it died on November 4 due to  starvation and injuries. On November 23, a tigress was a brought in good condition and no visible injuries were found on its body. With the permission of the competent authority, a transponder was inserted on her neck for possible future identification. Since she was prime aged tigress, as per the direction of the chief wildlife warden, she was released back into a habitat from similar to that she was rescued from.