Multi-lingual actor Prakash Rai on Monday criticised Prime Minister Narendra Modi for being silent on journalist-activist Gauri Lankesh’s murder and called him a ‘good actor.’

Rai said that he will not hesitate to return the national award conferred on him, as a mark of displeasure over the attitude of the Central government towards  Gauri’s  murder. He was given the national award for best actor for the Tamil film ‘’Kanchivaram’’ in 2009. He was speaking at the inauguration of the 63rd Wildlife Week walkathon- “Walk for Conservation of Wildlife.”

Rai said that though some people on social media were making foul comments 
on Gauri and her murder, the chief minister and the prime minister are silent on the issue.

Referring to the comments made by some RSS workers, Rai said: “Nobody knows who the killer is, but everybody knows who celebrated her death. Though Modi has all the information on the issue, he is pretending and this shows that he is a good actor. It has been a month since Gauri was murdered and yet not much progress has happened in the case. Also, till date Modi has not reacted on the issue.”

Convention in Delhi

A convention would be held at Jantar Mantar, New Delhi, on October 5, demanding the immediate arrest of assailants of Gauri, protection to writers and journalists and action against the elements curbing freedom of speech and expression.

The convention has been organised by Gauri Lankesh Hathya Virodi Vedike as it will be one month since Gauri Lankesh was shot dead at her Rajarajeshwari Nagar residence in Bengaluru.

“Progressive thinkers, intellectuals, writers and journalists from across India would participate in the convention. 

We demand that Prime Minister Narendra Modi make a statement on Gauri’s brutal murder during the event,” Neela K, social activist and the Vedike convenor, told reporters here on Monday.

The Vedike members weren’t happy with the progress made in the investigation by the Special Investigation Team (SIT). The SIT should speed up the investigation and arrest the assailants and their sponsors. The police should take action against those who celebrated Gauri’s murder on social media, besides making derogatory remarks about her, she added.

The Vedike members demanded the state government declare Gauri’s murder an act of terrorism, guarantee the freedom of speech and expression and action against fundamental organisations.