The notorious gang is back! 

Ocean’s Thirteen’ airs on August 24 at 9 pm on HBO. George Clooney, Brad Pitt, Matt Damon and many stars team up yet again with director Steven Soderbergh for another split-second 
caper.

Danny Ocean and the gang have only one reason to pull off their most ambitious and riskiest casino heist — to defend one of their own. But they are going to need more than luck on their side to break the ruthless Willy Bank and his casino. 

The plan is elaborate, dangerous and near impossible, but there are no limits when it comes to one of their own.ADVERTISEMENTGlimpses of a new arsenal

Follow Mack in ‘Futureweapons’, as he goes the extra mile to track down the new weapons and defence systems taking their place in the world’s arsenal to deal with the changing missions of 21st-century warfare. Tune in to this episode, as it gives viewers an interesting look at many of the breakthrough technologies to take on the challenges of terrorism, bomb threats and close-combat urban battle-fields. ‘Futureweapons’ airs on Discovery Science at 10 pm on August 24. A leap in timeParichay — Nayee Zindagi Kay Sapno Ka has taken a ten-year-jump. Samir Soni, who plays the male lead in it, says it will take the plot to another level and he is confident that the audience will connect to it as the characters remain the same. 

“A leap is just a tool to take the story forward. If you have done 250 episodes, you have explored all aspects and angles of a character — be it good, bad, happy, or sad. A leap allows you to put the situation in a different order,” Samir explains.

“Stories don’t work on television. It’s the characters that work. Stories are the same with love, hate and sacrifice. What works is the character and how he or she works in a show,” he adds. Parichay... started with the story of Kunal, a lawyer, who quits practice after being victimised by his employer. 

What if the leap doesn’t agree with the viewers?  “If this is done well, I don’t think the audience gets disconnected at all. It does take a little time to hook on, but then the continuity of the characters remain. It is just a matter of time and then they start adjusting to the newer show. Ninety per cent of the time, it goes well because what you are doing is that you are taking same characters and putting them in a new situation,” he says. 

The 43-year-old has been part of mainstream cinema as well and featured in 
‘China Gate’, Baghban, Vivaah and ‘I Hate Love Storys’, but feels it is television that keeps actors on their toes. 

“I am enjoying television. It is much more demanding than films. You have to do it daily for ten hours, like a job. The plus point is that whatever you do, you get to see it in a day or two. That way television keeps you on your toes. You get immediate gratification. People will either like you or hate you,” he points out, adding, “In movies, the gestation period is long. It might take a year to come and you have to wait for the response.” On a positive note...The promo of the upcoming flick Ajab Gazabb Love, starring Jackky Bhagnani, is already creating a bit of a stir on the web. The first trailer, which was recently unleashed online at midnight, has received one lakh sixty thousand hits in 48 hours. The funny and eye-catching promo has received such positive reviews that the entire cast and crew are pumped about the movie on another level altogether.

“Yes, the phenomenal response is definitely very reassuring and reaffirms our faith in the film. We were always very confident about the content of the film and now that we know that the audience is entertained with the promo itself, we’re gearing up for the next phase,” says producer Vashu Bhagnani. The movie stars Jackky Bhagnani, Nidhi Subbaiah, Arjun Rampal, Arshad Warsi and Kirron Kher. Directed by Sanjay Gadhvi, the romantic comedy is slated to release on October 24. The little wonders of IndiaYeh Mera India takes viewers on an exotic journey through India, from the epic Himalayan mountains, down the mighty river Ganges and across to the lost world of the North East, to explore its iconic wildlife, secret locations and grand terrains. Tune in to the show on 
Animal Planet at 8 pm on August 24.