One simple decision, that of relocating the proposed static radar from Narcondam Island can save one of India’s most endangered species, the Narcondam hornbill, writes Karthik Teegalapalli 

ADVERTISEMENTA proposal for the installation of a static radar with its power source in the Narcondam Island Wildlife Sanctuary in the Andaman and Nicobar archipelago was discussed at a meeting of the Standing Committee of the National Board of Wildlife on October 14, 2011.

 The proposal submitted by the Indian Coast Guard said the island was strategically located to monitor the movement of sea-going vessels as well as poachers and intruders frequenting the open waters in the area. However, the project itself threatens the future of the rare and endemic Narcondam hornbill (Aceros narcondami). 

Asad Rahmani of the Bombay Natural History Society, who led a site inspection team to the Narcondam Island in February, mentioned that the proposed site is a relatively undisturbed forest area where sightings of the birds were frequent. Their report recommended that the project be relocated to a nearby location that is not as ecologically important and fragile as Narcondam.  

Restricted species

Found only on the relatively small Narcondam Island, with an area of 6.8 sq km, the Narcondam hornbill is the most restricted species with the smallest geographic range in the country. With only around 300 birds surviving, the species is listed as ‘endangered’ by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) and is included as a Schedule 1 species (deserving highest degree of protection) in the Wildlife (Protection) Act. That such a small and remote island sustains a population of a species as large and unique as the hornbill is indeed a marvel of ancient bio-geography and evolution.

Because of their small population sizes and isolation, Narcondam hornbills – like most island species – are particularly vulnerable to all forms of disturbances – natural and man-made. Further, hornbills have very specific food and breeding preferences; they feed on fruits of large-seeded trees which are found in undisturbed forests and require mature soft-wooded tree species for nesting and roosting.

During nesting, the female hornbill and hatchlings enclose themselves within a nest cavity which makes them highly vulnerable to even the slightest anthropogenic disturbance. 
The proposed project will involve the cutting of mature trees in a 0.67 hectare area as well as along the road approaching the installation which is estimated to be about two kilometres long. This will significantly affect the feeding, nesting and roosting habits of the hornbills.

The island’s limited resources are already under pressure by the presence of a police outpost, which since 1969, has resulted in loss of over 50 acres of forest land. The island is only recovering from the earlier damage caused by introduced feral goats, which had severely suppressed natural regeneration patterns of trees, now. The road to the radar installation that is to be constructed will lead to further instability of the volcanic island. 

Nature Conservation Foundation, Mysore points out that at least 20 hectares of the island will be affected by the road and the installation directly, while about 400 hectares will be affected indirectly, considering the collateral effects of roads such as dessication and spread of invasives up to 100 metres or more on either side. 

Increased threat

Besides affecting the hornbill, the project will affect the coral reefs surrounding the island that have thus far remained relatively pristine, through anchor damage and direct dredging as well as the increased threat from invasive alien species to the island.

The island’s relatively untouched reefs and the hornbill are among India's most valuable natural assets. They must be secured at all costs. Usually, conservation in a country like India is multi-layered and complex, but in this case a simple decision to choose an alternative site can result in a conservation success story.  Jayanthi Natarajan, the Environment and Forests Minister has already taken up the issue of finding an alternate site with the Defence Minister A K Antony. Hopefully, the threat that the proposal poses to the island and its biodiversity can be averted.