60-year-old Jamela has had deep wounds for the past few years but its owner had been abusing the elephant constantly by taking it to festivals and functions without providing adequate rest and proper medical treatment.ADVERTISEMENTAfter disturbing images of Jamela with wounds went viral on the social media, the aged jumbo has been rescued from the owner in Tirunelveli and is now recuperating at an elephant rescue and rehabilitation centre run by the Tamil Nadu government near Tiruchirappalli.Jamela reached the rehabilitation centre on Sunday in a perfect gift on the occasion of International Women’s Day that fell on March 8. A S Ramesh, the activist who flagged the wounds and wrote to authorities concerned, told DH that the elephant seems to be have abused by the owner for years together despite severe wounds.“The owner had never bothered about the treatment of the elephant as he continued to abuse it to make money by not allowing it to take adequate rest. The elephant has been made to travel constantly despite the wounds that are severe in nature,” Ramesh told DH. He said the elephant was rescued and lodged at rehabilitation centre in just four days of him raising the issue with authorities.After veterinarians concluded that the elephant badly needed rest and treatment, massive efforts were mounted to shift Jamela from Ambasamudram in Tirunelveli district to Tiruchirappalli in the wee hours of Sunday.The elephant was loaded into a specially designed vehicle brought from Coimbatore by trained mahouts, who came from Pollachi, in the early hours of Sunday and brought to the camp by the afternoon.Veterinarians, who visited Jamela in the rehabilitation camp on Sunday, have decided on the treatment plan which is likely to begin in the next couple of days.“She is doing fine. She is taking rest at the rehabilitation camp since Sunday. A proper treatment plan is being worked out by veterinarians who have identified the problems faced by the jumbo,” Tiruchirappalli District Forest Officer D Sujatha told DH.Besides the wounds, Jamela has had a troubled past as it was separated from its calf at an early age and brought by the owner.“More than the treatment, what excites me is the fact that Jamela will be spending time with other elephants in the camp. She will be with the family of her kind probably for the first time. This will help her recover fast,” Ramesh told DH. The elephant rehabilitation centre already has five jumbos and Jamela is the sixth occupant.Explaining the rescue process, Tirunelveli District Forest Officer N Senthil Kumar said the efforts to send the elephant to rehabilitation camp was carried out with unprecedented speed. After the district-level elephant Captive Elephant Welfare Committee gave its seal of approval, the DFO approached the Chief Wildlife Warden based here for his nod.“Since the elephant was heavily wounded, we had to take necessary precautions to transport it. We asked for a specially designed vehicle from Coimbatore and mahouts from Pollachi who deal with elephants regularly for transporting the jumbo. We are happy that the elephant is now under rest,” Senthil Kumar told DH.