A forest is commonly understood as a patch of land with trees and many of the scientific classifications of forest types of India follow this over-simplistic categorisation of forest types based on tree species. This sole emphasis on trees and the stark neglect of shrubs, creepers, herbs and other vegetation in forests has had a significant impact on how forests have been managed in India.

ADVERTISEMENTFor many of the smaller wildlife such as frogs and reptiles, the layered vertical structure in the forest comprising shrubs, herbs and grasses, is also crucial for their wellbeing as they do not travel much unlike large mammals.  Apart from the tree cover, these layers have an important role in maintaining the microclimate, availability of food and living spaces needed for the survival of the smaller wildlife.

Harsh impacts
Presence of water bodies such as ditches, ponds, streams and rivers in these layered forests add to the complexity of the types of habitats available for wildlife to thrive. Removal of any of the layers due to logging or bad management practices can damage the microclimate and habitats and thereby lead to either reduction in population or decline in number of species.

A recent paper titled Effects of Historical Selective Logging on Anuran Communities in a Wet Evergreen Forest, South India, by K S Seshadri in the latest issue of Biotropica journal provides some interesting insights into how badly managed forests can have long term repercussions on an ecosystem’s health.

In the 1970s, large areas of forests were logged in Kalakad Mundanthurai Tiger Reserve (KMTR) near Tirunelveli in Tamil Nadu. This reserve falls in the Western Ghats range. In the last decade, close to 50 new species of frogs have been discovered in the Western Ghats. In some areas, commercially important tree species were logged selectively for timber and softwood industries. This type of “selective logging” is widely thought to have lesser detrimental impacts than deforestation, or indeterminate cutting down of trees.

Seshadri K S examined the effect of selective logging in reserve on frogs. He compared frog communities in selectively logged and unlogged forests to understand the impacts of logging. 

Since frogs are extremely sensitive to variations in atmospheric temperature and moisture availability, they face a dire threat of extinction due to deforestation. They cannot move around as much as large mammals and birds, making them excellent indicators of the state of the forest.

Comparative analysis
Across different types of habitats, selectively logged and unlogged forests contained similar kinds of species, but frog density was double in unlogged areas when compared to logged areas. 

Streams and forests immediately adjacent to streams had the highest density of frogs in both unlogged and logged areas. Stream and riparian areas are known to play a very vital role in regulating moisture and providing refugia to amphibians during drier months. 

The highest density of frogs was found on shrubs and bushes in both logged and unlogged forests. However, the density of frogs was least on rocks adjacent to streams in unlogged but was least in pools adjacent to streams. 

For example, the kodayar dancing frog occupied fast-flowing streams, leaf litter and pools adjacent to streams in unlogged forests but was found only in fast flowing streams and leaf litter in logged forests. It had reduced its ‘niche breadth’ probably because in logged areas, pools near streams were destroyed. 

On the other hand, the rock and grass bush frog, was found only on bushes in unlogged areas but was found on bushes, leaf litter and rocks adjacent to streams. This trend indicates an increase in niche breadth of the bush frog. This increase may be due to increased growth of understorey vegetation due to logging.

“Only a handful studies have examined the effects of such selective logging on amphibians and they all report negative effects. This study adds to the existing body of knowledge on the impacts of logging,” says Seshadri. 

“If only vegetation regeneration is examined, one would think the forests have recovered from the selective logging. But that would be untrue. This study clearly elucidates how the effects of logging have persisted on amphibian density and has affected the occupancy of niche and its overlap.”

In this study, leaf litter and water depth were found to be the most important environmental factors responsible for influencing amphibian densities. Greater the leaf litter thickness and water depth, higher the number of frogs. This finding is crucial because there are several species all along the Western Ghats that occupy leaf litter and dwell in streams. 

“Apart from the ill effects of logging, damming of rivers and streams under the pretext of mega and micro hydel projects will permanently alter the stream characteristics. Leaf litter harvest from forests for mulch can also have severe effects on frog populations,” he points out.

Even though this is a short study, it provides enough hints that managing forests is complex and a tree-centric management without considering the other vegetation layers and the interplay of water and land can have detrimental effects on a number of life forms. 

To come up with better management or conservation practices would require a number of changes in the present research and conservation practices in India. We should also strive to understand what changes are occurring in the ecosystem at the microhabitat level and their potential impacts on wildlife due to logging, mining, road and dam building activities or else it will be a case of missing the wood for the trees.