A youth who had taken up rabbit rearing as an excellent means of self-employment, is leading a content life now. 

ADVERTISEMENTGirish started rearing rabbits at Benki colony in Kadur and has achieved success in it. After getting inspiration from Vijaykumar of Sakharayapattana who has achieved success in rearing rabbit, Girish too jumped into it. 

For rearing rabbits, one need to have a cage which is 10 feet long and four feet wide. In one unit, seven female and three male rabbits can be reared. Newzeland White, California white, chinchilla rabbit and African Black rabbits can be reared in one cage. However, one can not rear wild rabbits as it would amount to violation of Wildlife Act. 

“During the first year, female rabbits will conceive six times. They can deliver six to ten bunnies at a time. The bunnies can be sold after 100 days of their birth. The fully grown rabbit weighs two to 3.5 kg. One can fetch Rs 150 per kg meat,” he said. 

Girish says “the rabbits should be fed with powder of ragi, wheat and jowar in the morning. In the afternoon, it can be fed with ‘garike hullu’ drumstick leaves, methi. One should not forget to give water.” 

“The rabbits can live in a temperature which varies from -2 degree to 38 degree celsius. The weather in Chikmagalur district is conducive for rearing rabbits. Several farmers in Kadur, Hulikere, Uddeboranahalli, Kaduralli, Balenahalli have already started rearing rabbits,” he says.

The rabbit meat is sold for Rs 150 per kg. Rabbit Farm, Davangere purchases rabbit from us. There is also good demand for rabbits in the local market,” he says. 

There is no fat content in rabbit meat. There is a great demand for rabbit pelts. The excreta of a rabbit can be a good manure. The excreta is sold for Rs 2,000 to Rs 3,000 per load, he says.  
Girish’s father Siddanayaka said “one cage which can rear 10 rabbits costs Rs 13,000. One will have to shell out Rs 6,000 for rearing rabbits annually. 

One will get 200 bunnies annually from 10 rabbits,” he added. Girish says “the rabbits will not be infected with diseases if they are reared in a hygienic condition. Change in the weather will affect rabbits and are likely to be infected with cold, fever and others,” he added.