River Cauvery flows at a calm pace in Bheemeshwari, a small town in Mandya district. Fringed by the dense Muthathi and Kollegal forests, the terrain here is verdant and picturesque, especially when drenched by rains. An early morning trek would be an absolute visual treat when the mist covers the hills in the vicinity.ADVERTISEMENTAnother striking feature of the region is the ecosystem here that interfaces between terrestrial and aquatic habitats, which grow along the rivers and streams and proffers a righteous dwelling for a variety of plant and animal species. In the midst of the serene backdrop of the Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary, distinct aquatic, terrestrial, arboreal and aerial species thrive. Trees form a delicate canopy providing ample shade to ease the heat of the blazing sun. Monkeys are abundant.The grizzled giant squirrel, an endangered species, can also be spotted here. Some owl species like the Indian scops owl can be seen nesting in the hollows of trees. The jungle brims with the melodious calls of birds and the fluttering of colourful butterflies. Amongst the land creatures, wild boars, spotted deer, jackals and many other reptiles and mammals are seen quite often. The river is home to several species of fish, including the mahseer, which is the largest tropical game fish that can weigh up to 60 kg. Earlier, Bheemeshwari was well known as a fishing camp but since the region lies in the forest zone, ecological conservation is of prime concern, and thus, fishing has been banned. And where there are fishes, there will be predators. Fishing birds like fish eagle and Brahminy kite glide smoothly over the waters attempting to make a catch.The marshland along the riverbed is ideal for the breeding of crocodiles, so swimming in the river can be dangerous. Along the bed of the majestic river, there are unique tree species with aerial roots that form a contiguous vegetative belt.Jungle Lodges and Resorts has set up an adventure and nature camp here, which offers high-thrill adventure activities such as ziplining, rope walking, coracle riding, kayaking and the like.Spotting animals and birds in their natural habitat and watching them live in action can be a sublime experience. A trip to this hamlet will certainly take you closer to nature.