Finding a second home for the famed Asiatic lions other than the Gir sanctuary in Gujarat has long been discussed and the Supreme Court has done well to clear the proposal. Conservationists have argued that some of the lions need to be relocated elsewhere so that their survival can be doubly ensured. But even such a sane proposal became controversial and the Supreme Court had to take a decision on that. The Gujarat government did not want to send any lions away from Gir as it said that the lions in the Gir forest were a matter of its ‘asmita’ (pride). Revenues from lion tourism were a consideration for the government but it was the parochial and regional sentiment that played a major part in the opposition. But the court has made it clear that “animals in the wild are properties of the nation to which no state can claim ownership.”

ADVERTISEMENTThe Gir forest has now just above 400 lions and they have been declared an endangered species by the International Conservation Union. Their numbers have grown from a narrow genetic base of about 25 animals about 100 years ago and that makes them vulnerable to diseases. An epidemic can cause havoc among the animals. Unexpected calamities like forest fires can also pose a danger. The Gir reserve is now overcrowded even after adding more forest areas to it. There have been instances of lions straying out of the sanctuary into human settlements. That is why the National Board for Wildlife had thought of setting up a second home for them.

The court has ordered that the ministry of environment and forests should shift some of the lions from Gir to the Palpur Kuno sanctuary in Madhya Pradesh within six months. The selection of the lions to be relocated may be done in such a way that the possibility of inbreeding can be minimised among the separate lion populations. The Gujarat government has claimed that the Kano sanctuary is not suitable for lions as it is not safe and well-managed. But conservationists have rejected this. Madhya Pradesh had already made arrangements to provide a congenial ecosystem for lions in the Kano sanctuary. Lions in  any case are known for their adaptability to new conditions. Rather than have the issue go to the Supreme Court for a decision the governments should have settled it among  themselves, keeping the survival and well-being of the animals in mind.