Dance

Dance drama

Shriram Bharatiya Kala Kendra will raise the curtain on the much awaited dance drama, Krishna which portrays the journey of the icon from his adorable childhood and youthful antics, to the centre stage of human reverence.

 A magnificent, choreographic presentation of a legend replete with mythology and adulation for over three thousand years is produced and directed by Shobha Deepak Singh. Venue: Kamani Auditorium from August 6-11. Time: 6.30pm onwards. For details contact: 43503333.

Guru shishya

On occasion of 36th anniversary of Natya Tarangini’s, Raja Radha Reddy institute of Kuchipudi dance, an evening of Kuchipudi recital will be presented by its students. Venue: Epicentre on August 3. Time: 7.30pmADVERTISEMENTCelebrating youth

10th Annual Celebration of the Youth Parliament- Imprompt - Wired For Sound A Community Arts collaboration will have performances by Adil and Vasundhra, The Yellow Brick Project, Manzil Mystics in collaboration with Adhir Ghosh (Five8), Abhishek Mangla and Chayan Adhikari (Advaita), Suhail Yusuf Khan and Tiny Drops, Music Basti and DJ MoCity. Venue: India Habitat Centre on August 3 and 4. Time: 7.30pm. For further information contact:  43663080.

Melodious journey

Sawan Aya Re’s author Pran Nevile presents an illustrated introduction to the rainy season, followed by a concert by Rashmi Agarwal. Venue: India Habitat Centre on August 7. Time: 7.00pm.
Classical notes
Lovers of classical music can look forward to a sitar recital by Ustad Sayeed Zafar followed by a vocal recital by vidushi Savita Devi, daughter of the late Ghazal Queen Siddheshwari. The programme will be organised in collaboration with Prawah Music Society. Venue: IHC on August 8. 
Time: 7.00pm.

PHOTOGRAPHY

Capturing life 
‘The Hidden People’ is a solo exhibition of photographs by Adhar Maheshwari who mostly does street or documentary photography. Making decisions about perspective, composition and direction in the heat of the moment she conveys an intimate portrait of life and lives.

 Adhar takes the viewer on a journey to make him see things such as men deserting their villages, children building castles by the roadside and young blood confronting the government on underground walls.  All these are silent and out of sight but visible to anyone who truly wants to understand India. 
Venue: Lalit Kala Akademi, Copernicus Marg till August 7. Time: 11am-7pm.

Shooting animals
‘The Other Side’, a wildlife photography exhibition by Arfin Zukof displays the urgent need to protect our wildlife in the face of possible extinction. In a country where all forms of life are revered, this exhibition captures the last 50 years that have caused the most frenetic exploitation of our wildlife and celebrates the denizens of the great Indian wilderness. 
Venue: Gallery No. 8, Lalit Kala Akademi, Copernicus Marg till August 7. Time: 11am-7pm.

DramaComic point
RAS Theatre Group presents Here Lies the Point, a hilarious Hindi comedy play written by Dhirendra Verma and directed by Gajraj Naagar. It is based on the ups and downs of a husband-wife relationship. Due to some misunderstanding wife Mallika doubts her husband’s character without addressing the core issue and analysing the situation and little 
realising that her husband Mr. Verma is a man of jolly nature, who believes in enjoying life. The story proceeds and tussle starts between them. Watch the play to know whether their relation improves or the tussle continues? 
Venue: Amphitheatre, IHC on August 5. Time: 7 pm. 
Musical staging
Hilley-Ley, the Annual theatre festival of Kutumb Foundation will stage Saudagari, a 120 minute musical inspired by Shakespeare’s The Merchant of Venice. The play is adapted, directed and produced by Mohit and Sumit who seek to engage and enable young minds through creative art forms and active learning by presenting an adaptation of Shakespeare set in Delhi schools and colleges. Where everything is measured by money and “hip”-ness and sacrifice is a fairly unknown phenomenon, where is the place for a friendship such as that of Antonio and Bassanio? What chance does Portia have of standing up to the men in her world? How can a Shylock come into his own with a caste tag around his neck? Venue: Main Building, IIC on August 5. Time: 6 pm. For details contact: 24619431.

Medical satire
Crazy Spotlight Productions presents Sab Theek Hai, Doctor Sahab? Watch six  characters defy every rule in the book as they create a world far from what is considered normal. Sab Theek Hai... is a wild farce that moves at a frantic pace and guarantees to entertain. Venue: LTG, Copernicus Marg, Aug 3-5. 
Time: 7:00 pm. 
Mercy killing
Kanak and Ras Theatre Group will present a Hindi play Fandi. The 90 minute production by  Sushil Kumar Gautam asks the question ‘Can mercy killing be justified?’ What the law labels as a brutal murder, for Fandi it was just a rational way to end an individual’s agony. He had killed his father, rather a patient of carcinoma, whose lungs had reached the last stage, 
pleading for an end every hour of the day. But, is there any law greater than humanity? This play attempts to 
answer some of the above questions in the huge rooms of korat. 
Venue: Amphitheatre, IHC on August 4. 
Time: 7pm.  

ART Nature tale
An exhibition titled ‘First Cause’ is the new series of paintings by artist Kota Neelima that explores first nature, first choice and change, first rain and sun, and the first day of creation. The medium of these paintings is oil on canvas and the style is impressionist-abstract. The works centre around the question of the Upanishads that asks what is the cause of the universe by knowing which all can be known and all can be explained. The exhibition consists of 42 works made over a period of two years and each work is a part of the continuous string of thought on the circumstances of creation. Venue: Visual Art Gallery, India Habitat Centre till August 6. Time: 10 am to 8 pm. 

Rough images
Art Spice and Babita Gupta present ‘Fractals to Phases’, a solo show by artist Nihariekka Lohia featuring fractals that describe the roughness of the world, its energy, its dynamical changes and transformations. Venue: Art Spice Gallery, The Metropolitan Hotel and Spa, Bangla Sahib Road till August 23.
 
Rainy weather 
Art Pilgrim presents ‘Monsoon’, a group show of artworks that celebrate Indian art in the same way as we celebrate the onset of monsoon. This group show includes works of FN Souza, T Vaikuntam, Neeraj Goswami, Chandra Bhattacharjee, Sanatan Dinda and sculptures by KS Radhakrishnan and Dhananjay Singh among others. Venue: Epicentre from August 3-6. Time: 10.00am-8.00pm.

Ludicrous figures
A solo show of art works by Aditya Vikram Sen titled ‘Distorted Liberation’ shows an expanse of mutilated forms and grotesque figures, some just faces, others in fulsome portraits or nude postures. Many are charcoal drawings on paper while others oil pastels on board or canvas. Most look lonesome and lost and a few make for an engaging and captivating art-scape. 
Venue: Gallery Art Positive, Lado Sarai till August 11. Time: 10am to 7pm.

potpourriShady lamps 
Ishatvam presents an exhibition titled Lighting Splendour which will showcase an elegant variety of materials, designs and styles, both classic and contemporary. Venue: 348 D, MG Road, Sultanpur and 18B Khan Market from August 9-18. Time: 11 am to 7.30 pm. For details contact: 43528380 /81.

Intellectual discussion
Alliance Française de Delhi and the French Embassy in association with The Lalit Suri Hospitality Group will present Writers, Etc. – Session 15 with Shobhaa De in conversation with Chiki Sarkar. The concept Writers, Etc. is a literary platform, a space where the written word gets primacy, written ideas and their practitioners interact with each other and general public comes together to ask questions and seek answers. Venue: M. L. Bhartia Auditorium, Alliance Francaise on August 9. 
Time: 6.30pm.

Funny bone 
The Papa CJ Comedy Company presents the Best of Hinglish Comedy, a 75-minute show that will have best Hinglish comedians from all over India like Monty Singh, Zakir Khan, Yadvinder Brar, Deepak Dhamija, Appurv Gupta and Vipin Hero. Venue: Epicentre, Gurgaon on August 4. Time: 7.30pm and 9.30pm. For details contact: 0124-2715000.

Wedding extravaganza
Just before the wedding season begins, Vivaha presents the 10th Edition of one of Asia’s largest wedding exhibition with a more spectacular and luxurious range of wedding apparels and accessories all under one roof. 
Venue: Hotel Ashok from August 3-5. Time: 11 am to 8 pm.

Retro night
Enjoy retro night with DJ Rohan who will churn out some whacky music to make the listeners dance all night. Venue: Smoke House Grill, Masjid Moth, GK II on August 3. Time: 9 pm onwards.  FILMS

 Boy’s story 
Lettere Dal Sahara (Letters from Sahara) an Italian film by  Vittorio de Seta will be screened with English subtitles. Its story revolves around young Assane who interrupts his studies and emigrates to Italy. Shipwrecked on Lampedusa, he is transferred to Sicily. A lot happens in the course of events and he gets frustrated for not having lived up to his family’s expectations. Venue: Italian Embassy Cultural Institute on August 4. Time: 2 pm.

Orange narrative
Instituto Cervantes and the Embassy of Venezuela will open the Venezuelan film series with the screening of Luis Alberto Lamata’s Nude with Oranges. The film is a journey through a very difficult period of Venezuelan’s history. Venue: Auditorium, Instituto Cervantes, 48, Hanuman Road, Connaught Place on August 5. Time: 4.30 pm. Entry is free.