A decade ago, this lake was brimming with birds of varied species from far away Europe making it an eco hot spot. Now, it still remains the same, but for local birds, thanks to the silt that’s slowly taking its toll on winged friends.

ADVERTISEMENTShetty lake, more popular as Mandakalli kere (lake) for being located at the entrance of the village on Mysore-Ooty national highway- 212 is the safe haven for birds of different species. 

Dalwoy lake on the same stretch is evidently polluted with refuse- both liquid and solid let into the water body from adjacent localities. 
Water hyacinth that occupies the vast part of the lake is an indication of deep silt. 

Though Shetty lake too is occupied with hyacinth, it’s in a smaller part.
When Deccan Herald visited Shetty lake on Tuesday, a flock of birds enjoying the glide in water, flapping wings at times and chirping, made for a visual treat. It seemed as if, the hustle and bustle of the highway was nothing to deter them.

Migratory birds 

Wildlife expert Rajkumar said migratory birds like Ghargany, Shoveller, Cotton Teal and many others totalling 5,000 species of birds were arriving here from faraway European nations during winter as the lakes there were drying up and the birds were taking a long route looking for food alongside water in other countries. 

Shetty lake was one such spot, which was attracting birds from faraway countries. It was after arriving here, the birds were moving to other lakes in the surrounding parts.

Common Teal, one of the smallest ducks in the world, was spotted here between 2000 and 2002, exactly one decade ago. What we see now is local Common Teals, Ruddy Shell duck, Egrets, Spotbilled Pelicans, Painted Stork, Cormoret and Darter (snake bird). Among them, ducks of different species form the majority, besides pelicans and egrets in very few.

He attributed it to the silt and toxic contents that has kept the birds away. Birds prefer water bodies for multiple reasons. From fishes to grains available in the neighbouring fields, and trees that could help them to stay away from people’s reach, to name a few.

A local farmer said, whenever the city receives heavy rain, the lake reaches its brim attracting birds in large numbers. 

Owing to weak monsoon, the water level is moderate. Earlier, there were gun toting hunters who were killing the birds here to feed at poultry farms. 

When the villagers came to know about the same, they warned them against killing birds. 

Needless to say, the credit of rescuing the lake from dying, also goes to them.