The rain-fed mighty Brahmaputra and its tributaries flowing above the danger level across Assam have hit nearly one lakh people inundating human habitations and farm land in ten districts with Dhemaji being the worst-hit.

ADVERTISEMENTIncessant rainfall in the catchment areas of the state's upper reaches and neighbouring Arunachal Pradesh has raised the water level of the Brahmaputra throughout the state and it was flowing above the danger level at Nematighat in Jorhat, official sources said.

Its tributaries Jia Bharali at N T Road Crossing in Sonitpur district and Dhansiri at Numaligarh in Golaghat district were also flowing above the red mark.

The first wave of floods this season since June last has claimed so far one human life in Morigaon district besides an elephant and an antelope perished in Nagaon district near Kaziranga National Park in Golaghat district.

The surging waters have flooded Dhemaji, Nagaon, Golaghat, Jorhat, Kamrup, Karimganj, Lakhimpur, Morigaon, Sivasagar and Tinsukia districts affecting nearly one lakh people and rendered many homeless.

Severe erosion was also reported in many places along the fast flowing rivers washing away huge chunk of land, the sources said. 

The flood has also hit the habitats of the one-horn rhinoceros at Kaziranga National Park in upper Assam and Pobitora Wildlife Sanctuary in lower Assam.

Over 70 per cent of Kaziranga is under water forcing the animals to take shelter on highlands and in the Karbi Anglong hills outside the 430-sq km Park by crossing National Highway 37, the sources said.

With 60 per cent of the 38.80-sq km Pobitora Santuary overrun by the surging waters of the Brahmaputra on its northern side and the Kopili and Kolong rivers in the southern part, they said rhinos, deer, pigmy hogs, wild buffalos and other animals were taking shelter on the high platforms built there for their succour.

Roads, bridges and culverts have been damaged in Golaghat district affecting road communication, while an embankment breached each at Madanpur and Chandpur in arimganj district, they said.

Meanwhile, five relief camps were set up in Dhemaji district with gratuitous relief materials provided to its inmates and other flood affected people across the state.