Revenue and District In-charge Minister V Srinivas Prasad, on  Wednesday, expressed his disappointment over the pathetic living condition of tribals in the country. He attributed it to lack of adequate measures to bring them into mainstream.

ADVERTISEMENTSpeaking after inaugurating a ‘Tribal Cultural fest’ organised jointly by Kannada and Culture department, Kuvempu Institute for Kannada Studies, Folklore department of University of Mysore (UoM), the minister said tribal people were living in worst conditions with lack of health and education facilities.

The country has provided very least facilities for their betterment, he said. Every country in the world has tribal communities and in Western countries, people treat tribals in a well and respectful manner. Tribals are provided with all the basic facilities like good health facilities and education, helping them lead a dignified life, he added.

It is exactly opposite in India, where tribals are deprived of many facilities with very little benefits for their uplift. The culture, art and tradition still exist only because of tribals, he added.

‘Key role’
Tribals are basically forest dwellers and still play a key role in conserving forest resources and wildlife. But, owing to certain reasons, the authorities are shifting them to urban areas, the decision should be reconsidered, he opined.

Mayor B L Bhyrappa said current scientific knowledge can be attributed to our ancestors. Forests exist still only because of tribals, who should be brought into mainstream, he said. Mysuru Urban Development Authority (MUDA) Chairman K R Mohan Kumar said, “Every individual has a responsibility to protect tribal culture. The State and Central governments have introduced several schemes for their development.”

Earlier, in the day tribals from Mysuru, Mandya, Chamarajanagar and Kodagu districts took out a colourful procession from the main gate of Manasagangotri, PG campus of University of Mysore. Tribals performed traditional folk arts.

Deputy Mayor Vanita Prasanna,  Zoo Authority of Karnataka Chairperson Rehana Banu, Kannada and Culture department Assistant Director Nirmala Matapathi and Tribal Welfare Officer Bharati were present.
DH News Service