The Anti Corruption Bureau (ACB) raided four government officials and unearthed disproportionate assets. 

The officials raided include Srihari, assistant engineer with the Minor Irrigation Department; Swamy, panchayat development officer at Kasaba Hobli in Ramanagaram; Shivaram Achari, range forest officer at Bannur Range of Mookambika Wildlife Sanctuary near Kollur and Manjunath, assistant executive engineer with the Rural Drinking Water and Sanitation Department.

ACB officials raided Srihari's house in Pavagad and his father-in-law's house in Sira. The officials recovered documents pertaining to 87 acres of agricultural land in various parts of Pavagad taluk worth Rs 50 lakh in the names of the official’s wife and father-in-law. 

The officer also possessed four sites worth Rs 14 lakh in Pavagad, Tiptur and Bengaluru, a two-storied house in Pavagad worth Rs 17 lakh and investments of Rs 11 lakh in Sahara India mutual fund. 

The ACB sleuths raided Swamy's house in Ramanagaram and a relative Lokesh's house in Bengaluru and found that the officer owned a two-storied house in Channapatna worth Rs 35 lakh, two sites in Channapatna worth Rs 2 lakh, agricultural land (2.5 acres) in Maddur worth Rs 6 lakh and Rs 20 lakh in six savings accounts at banks in Channaptna and Ramanagaram.

The range forest officer at Kollur in Udupi district owned a house and a site in Kambhadakone near Kundapur worth Rs 60 lakh, two commercial complexes in Kundapur worth Rs 25 lakh, a site worth Rs 2 lakh in the name of his wife Shobha, a government teacher. 

The ACB sleuths found Rs 3.7 lakh in cash from a guest house in Kollur, Rs 1 lakh cash in a car parked at the officer's Kambhadakone house and Rs 3 lakh from the house of the officer's mother-in-law at Kirimanjeshwara near Kundapur.

Similarly, the ACB officials raided Manjunath's house and also two of his relatives' houses in Kolar. The ACB sleuths found that the officer owned a duplex house in Gandhinagar worth Rs 2 crore, another house in Sarige Nagar worth Rs 30 lakh, a brick factory in Kolar worth Rs 30 lakh, three acres agricultural land at Amanikere in Kolar worth Rs 54 lakh. 

ADVERTISEMENT