An exhibition of over 500 rare and amazing photographs began at Karnataka Chitrakala Parishat here on Monday.ADVERTISEMENTThese photographs have been clicked by internationally acclaimed photographers who participated and won at the 17th International Federation of Photographic Art (FIAP) Nature Biennial World Cup and also the Karnataka Tourism All India Photography Competition. 

A total of 520 photographs are on display of which 200 have been chosen from FIAP and 120 by the tourism department. The week-long exhibition from December 1-7 was inaugurated by Karnataka Chief Secretary Kaushik Mukherjee. Also present on the occasion were ace wildlife photographer Thanjavur Nateshacharya Ayyam Perumal, noted wildlife documentary duo Krupakar- Senani, CKP President B L Shankar and General Manager of Canara Bank Bangalore Metro Circle Ravindra Bhandary. 

Speaking to media on the sidelines of the exhibition, Mukherjee said: “Photography was gradually becoming an interesting and important profession. But it is important for it to be controlled in forests. The carrying capacity should be understood and not violated. We cannot ban people from entering forests, people need information, but it should be regulated.” 

Apart from photographs the international award documentary “Walking with the Wolves” made by Krupakar- Senani will also be screened for the first time in Bengaluru on December 6.

Many art and photography lovers thronged the venue on the first day. People were awestruck to see the life-like images especially of two tigers standing on their hind limbs and fighting, leopards mating, cheetah hunting, birds mating and hunting. The nature images captured at its splendid beauty too speak volumes. 

As many as 24 countries had contested with 423 acclaimed nature and wildlife photographers had sent their works in the print and projected images category. Italy bagged the World Cup in the print section and South Africa in the projected images category. India had won the gold medal in images and bronze in the projected images category. Apart from photographs of all these winners, photographs of award winning Indians- Jayadev Basappa, Philip Ross, Clement Francis and Manjunath S K- too are on display.