History, nostalgia and man's eternal quest for seizing the moment came together at Karphilex 2017, the three-day philately exhibition that began on Friday, after a gap of about 10 years.

Walking amid rows of steel frames displaying philately materials was nothing less than living an encyclopedia as the stamps and other materials displayed took one on a memorable journey.

Stamps and postal covers stretching across two centuries, covering India's colonial history together with rich culture, welcomed visitors at Sri Raja Rajeshwari Hall on Dr Rajkumar Road. There are also stalls where one can buy rare stamps, postal covers and other materials with many philately shops from across India offering their best collections. The largest collection of stamps focuses on Mahatma Gandhi. 

Each stamp became a window to the world as the exhibitors offered to explain their historical circumstances and cultural heritage. Stamps commemorating the British history, freedom struggle, Ramayana, Mahabharata, modern India, cricket as well as progress in science are lined up for visitors.

“Since its inception in 1975, the Karnataka Philatelic Society has been promoting philately as a hobby. Provided India’s rich background, even foreign postal agencies are commemorating Indian Philatelic Society. We need to understand that each stamp has a story behind it,” said K Chaitanya Dev, president of Karnataka Philatelic Society (KPS).
Chief Post Master General, Karnataka, Charles Lobo inaugurated the exhibition as scores of philately enthusiasts waited for the moment on Friday. The first day celebrated ‘Kannada Heritage’ with wildlife conservation and stamp mela, respectively, in the following days.

Lobo released two special covers before inaugurating the exhibition on Friday and urged people to nurture their interest in philately. “A gap of 10 years is not good. We should organise more exhibitions to help philatelists come together. The Department of Posts will support such exhibitions,” he said.

Nikhilesh Melkote, general secretary of KPS, said the society received 115 requests for exhibition from across the country, 30 of them from youngsters. “There were many exhibitors we could not accommodate due to paucity of space,” he said.