Sally Mann once said that ‘Photographs open doors to the past, but they also allow a look into the future’. This is one of the main aspects that ‘SoulScope’, a wildlife photography club, looks into when they set out to the forest to take some mind-blowing shots. 

ADVERTISEMENTStarted about 6 years ago, the club was launched by Suhas Premkumar, who is an environmentalist and photographer. He says, “I’ve been rescuing snakes for the past 12 years. When I realised that I can use my experience and love for photography together to educate others, I decided to start ‘SoulScope’ and everything fell into place from there.” While the team sets out to bring back some pictures, each one of them is also educated about the species that they encounter. “It’s important that you understand the basics of handling a wild animal for your picture. You have to do it in such a way that you don’t disturb their environment. So there are certain ethics that one has to follow in order to get a good shot, but everything should also be done in moderation,” Suhas adds. 

The members visit places like the Western Ghats, Kudremukh and Bandipur National Park for their adventurous trips at least once a month. But as monsoon is a good time to see more of wildlife, they visit twice a month then. Recalling one such trip, Phalgun Kumar, a senior project engineer, says, “If you want to spend a night in the middle of the jungle, sleeping under the stars in a tent, listening to the sound of water streams, Kudremukh is the best place. It was one of the best expeditions that I have been on with the team. We spotted a Malabar Pit Viper for the first time on the trek to Kurinjal Peak!”

With 5 active members and 8 volunteers, the club has started a new initiative to bring in more awareness among the students in the City. Explaining the idea of ‘College Concepts’, Samvita says, “We are tying up with a few colleges and teaching them about wildlife photography. We also educate them about the different aspects of wildlife — mountains, soil, trees and different species. It’s going to be a complete course where the idea is to remove the fear in people rather than removing the wild animal.” Apart from college students, the club has also trained around 1,500 people in Lalbagh and other nearby places in and around the City on how to handle wild animals. And for their long expeditions, they also make sure that they venture only so far into the jungle so that it’s just 15 minutes away from the hospital which stocks anti-venoms if needed. 

Software developer Harshit J V is also thrilled to be a part of the club. He says, “I attended all the camps last year and all of them have helped me understand what nature has to offer and how we can connect with it. I had a fair knowledge of butterflies, but after joining the club, a new world has opened up for me — the world of birding and herping.”

Shishir Hemanth, the marketing personnel of the club, talks about his love for photography and says, “I used to drive around the forest with a friend of mine, but after I joined ‘SoulScope’, I realised that there’s more to learn. I can now identify different types of wildlife and have also learnt the right way to handle them. It’s nice that during the camp, we go out together as a team and learn everything we can as one.”

As for Pradeep Krishnamurthy, a senior manager, and Sneha Kumari, a communication manager, their experience with the club has been a rather memorable one. 

They say, “‘SoulScope’ is not only teaching photography in the most different and effective way, but they are also doing a wonderful job of raising awareness about the importance of nature and our responsibility towards it. We are thankful for the change that this club has brought in us.”

The club can be contacted at www.facebook.­com/SoulScope.