Dear Sir,ADVERTISEMENTI have completed mechanical engineering in 2015, and an MBA(Finance), in 2017. Now, I'm doing another MBA(Operations). I want to pursue PhD. My concern, however, is which stream will be suitable for me? What is the eligibility? Please guide.SachinDear Sachin,You have already qualified yourself well and after so much studies you should be in a position to narrow down to what area of research or teaching you would like to pursue. Do not decide to go for PhD unless you are sure what subject suits you most, and how you will use your higher studies for making your career. Most good institutions admit students based on the NET exam conducted by UGC. Details are available on www.ugcnetonline.in.Dear Sir,I am a PUC II student (Science). I have explored various areas that I could pursue my higher education in. However, I am unable to decide on anything. My interest lies in the fields related to Biology. 
Please guide.NawazDear Nawaz,If you are at least clear that you would like to make a career in the field of Biology, make a list of all careers related to it. Then, work out what lifestyle would suit you most, what are the chances of getting admission based on your academic performance so far, and what are the skills required to be successful in each of those fields.That way you will be able to narrow down systematically. If you are unable to do so, then instead of taking suggestions from unconnected people, speak to those who are in careers related to Biology, or even undergo an aptitude test and career guidance from a professional counsellor.Dear Sir,Please let me know the difference between the qualifications offered by The Institute of Cost Accountants of India (ICWA) and The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI). Which one is better?ShaheenDear Shaheen,The Institute of Cost Accountants of India, (www.icmai.in) offers the ICWA certification that enables a person to monitor the costing, production process, profitability and efficiency of any organisation. The Institute of Chartered Accountants India (www.icai.org) offers the Chartered Accountancy (CA) certification, which authorises the person to audit the accounts of any organisation, submit them to the government authorities, and also point out errors and corrections.Both require a person to go through a series of tests at Intermediate and Final stages, and internship. Only CAs have the powers to certify accounts. Hence every organisation needs the services of a CA. ICWA is an option that companies may or may not choose to go through. Hence, the demand for CAs is much higher, and the qualifying exams are also tougher.If you are keen on CA and are studying in Class 11 or above, you can enrol with the institute for the common proficiency test (CPT) which is held twice a year, while you continue with your studies. Clearing CPT in the first attempt is an indicator that you are CA material and can then pursue the 
rest of the programme.Dear Sir,I am studying in Class 11. I love Physics. Please suggest some courses that I could pursue after Class 12. Could you also provide some information about the Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana (KVPY) examination?MFDear MF,KVPY is an exam conducted for students of Class 11 and 12, and Science degree students. It entitles you to scholarships if you are pursuing courses in Science. It is also used for admission to Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER), National Institute of Science Education and Research (NISER) and other institutions for Pure Science courses.Study of Pure Sciences is emerging as a challenging and rewarding career option, so if you are passionate about it, do write KVPY this year and again next year if necessary, and try to get into one of the institutions.Dear Sir,I am a Class 11 Science student. I would like to pursue a career in Medicine or Dentistry in Karnataka. Though I am a Overseas Citizenship of India (OCI) card holder, I did my schooling in Bengaluru. With all the confusion post NEET exams last year, there is still no clarity on admissions for OCI students like me. I would like to know under what quota I could apply to gain admissions into a medical college in Karnataka. Kindly advise.TinaDear Tina,As you are aware, the government has made it compulsory for most medical colleges all over the country to take in only those students who have cleared the NEET exam. There is still a doubt about OCI and the courts are likely to resolve the issue soon. So, do go ahead and give in your application for NEET as the last date is March 9. Keep checking the status on their website cbseneet.nic.in. As a precaution look into alternative health related courses such as paramedical sciences, nutrition, veterinary, depending on your interest.Dear Sir,My son is studying in Class 12 (Science), with Physics, Chemistry, Maths and Biology as his electives. He is interested in Biology, but doesn't want to take up medical stream. Is there any course that has Biology as a major subject and less of Mathematics? 
Please guide.ShashidharDear Shashidhar,There are many good options for Biology students, which do not require proficiency in Maths. Let him set his long term goals in careers related to Life Sciences like agriculture, forestry, nutrition, paramedical, environment and wildlife. Based on that, he can take up a degree course in the relevant field. If despite all efforts he cannot narrow down, he can either go for an aptitude test, or take up a degree with Botany, Zoology and any other subject of his choice in a good college, and then decide upon what he would like to specialise in once he comes to final year.Dear Sir,I am 50 years old and have done my medical education. I am currently working in the State Health Department. I would like to pursue an education in Law. How should I go about?AnonymousDear Anonymous,It is good that you wish to enhance your learning. If you wish to practice as an advocate, then you can join a three-year LLB course which is open to all graduates and has no age limit. There are many colleges offering this course, and their list can be obtained from Karnataka State Law University (www.kslu.ac.in). On the other hand, if you wish to study law for medical purposes, you can join the one-year PG Diploma in Medical Law offered by National Law School University of India (www.nls.ac.in).