The Saurashtra region was lashed by incessant rains following a deep depression over the Arabian Sea which crossed the state's coast and moved further inside, even as Amreli district administration sought help from NDRF and IAF to rescue people from 12 marooned villages.

ADVERTISEMENTTwo teams of National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) and two helicopters of Indian Air Force have been called in to rescue people from the villages where water levels are increasing rapidly, Amreli District Collector H R Suthar said.

"Some parts of Amreli received very heavy rainfall since early morning, resulting in flood-like situation in many parts. All the rivers of the district are overflowing, cutting off 12 villages," Suthar said.

"To rescue people and take them to safer places, we have sought help from NDRF and Air Force. We have learnt that two teams of NDRF are on their way. The Air Force has already started their operation through one of their helicopters while another will join in the operation shortly," he said.

At present, local police and fire officials are carrying out rescue work, the Collector said.
Apart from Amreli, heavy rains lashed many other districts of Saurashtra region today, including Rajkot, Gir-Somnath, Bhavnagar, Junagadh and Devbhoomi-Dwarka, disrupting normal life.

The heavy rains occurred following the deep depression developed yesterday in the Arabian Sea that later crossed the coast near Diu town. However, MeT department's Gujarat Centre here said that the system will weaken in next 24 hours.

The dams in Saurashtra received fresh stock of water which has largely solved drinking water problem in the area.

The coastal town of Una in Gir Somnath district received 360 mm of rains overnight which was still continuing, while Talala village near Gir wildlife sanctuary received 288 mm downpour, Saurashtra's rain control room said.

Besides, Malia Hatina in Junagadh district received 279 mm rains, Amreli town recorded 203 mm downpour, while Rajkot received 203 mm rainfall in the last 24 hours.

In South Gujarat, Surat city got 42 mm rains, Kaprada in Valsad district received 58 mm rainfall in last 24 hours.

In Rajkot, District Education Officer Chetna Vyas directed the authorities in low lying areas not to run schools in the afternoon shift.

The Bhadar dam in Rajkot was overflowing as it received 10 feet of water stock, district control room officials said, adding that it will solve the drinking water problems of Rajkot city for a year.

The Rawal and Ozat dams in Junagadh were also overflowing and authorities have put villages and nearby towns on alert.