Krupakar and Senani, the renowned wildlife photographers, are working on their new project — snow leopards. It’s already one year since they have been tracking the rare species of big cats, near Kargil at Jammu and Kashmir.

ADVERTISEMENTParticipating in an interaction, organised by Mysore District Journalists’ Association (MDJA) here on Wednesday, Senani said, “We have been researching on snow leopards. But still not undecided on whether to make a documentary on them,”For this, they have been camping at Kargil and lucky to spot the leopard once or twice. “It’s only when we are satisfied about the plot, we will think further about it,” Senani said after the interaction.

Earlier, interacting with media persons in the wake of their recent feat of winning an award for their documentary ‘Walking with Wolves’ at the CMS Vatavaran Environment and Wildlife Film Festival, New Delhi, Senani narrated how intriguing the journey with wolves was at Raichur, Davangere and other districts in the northern parts of the State.

“Even after six months of working on the project, there was no sight of a wolf. Unlike other animals, it’s not easy to find a pack of wolves, as they roam single throughout the day. Sub-adults carry calves in different directions and return to their dens in the evening hours. It’s only later they assemble in a place, making it difficult to track,” Senani said.

Similar was the experience of nomads and shepherds, the duo came across, who were initially weary of them, fearing they may harm the animal. It’s only later did they open up and shared their lore on wolf.

The bond between shepherds and wolf is such that the former has no qualms whenever the wolves hunt any sheep in the herd, Senani said.

He also shared some unsavoury and funny experiences while camping at the villages, where people mistook them for child traffickers. Once, owing to their tryst with literature, they were summoned to a station by a police officer. Till they went to the station, they were unaware of the fate to befall them. Their apprehensions turned false, when the police officer asked them to fine-tune his poetry, Senani said.