‘Krishi Ratha’ by the Agriculture Department was the first tableau to roll out during the Dasara Jamboo Savari procession, once again asserting the State government’s farmer-friendly stand, on the premises of the Amba Vilas Palace here on Friday.

ADVERTISEMENTIt may be mentioned that the State government had invited Puttaiah, a progressive farmer, to launch the Dasara festivities, atop the Chamundi Hill on October 13.

The tableau displayed a mechanical paddy planting machine and replicas of dairy farming, stressing on upgradation of agricultural practices and depicting dairy farming as an alternative. It also had slogans against relying on private money-lenders and appeal to approach banks for loans. Various government schemes like Krishi and Pashu Bhagya were highlighted.

Though the number of tableaux were reduced, due to low-key Dasara this year, 23 tableaux and 41 cultural troupes participated in the procession.

Many firsts

There were many firsts in the tableaux procession this year. The tableau of Mysuru City Corporation (MCC), highlighting Mysuru city’s achievement in bagging the first place as the cleanest city in the country attracted many. The tableau had LCD screens airing audio-visual clippings of Mayor R Lingappa’s message to keep the city clean, segregation of waste and others. The pourakarmikas of MCC with their uniforms marching along with the tableau, was led by MCC Commissioner C G Betsurmath.

The tableau of Kannada and Culture department, displaying Anubhava Mantapa and a picture of writer late M M Kalaburgi along with a slogan ‘Samshodhaka Tappu Hela bahudu, Sullu Helalara’, was a tribute to the writer. 

New additions were the tableaux of the University of Mysore, highlighting its centenary celebrations, and of Zoo Authority of Karnataka on protection of wild animals in the State.

Tableaux

The other tableaux of Archaeology, Heritage and Museums Departments showcased the renovated Varadaraja temple, Varkod, in phases. Different types of medicinal practices were highlighted by Ayush Department’s tableau. 

The tableau of Backward Classes and Minorities Department showcased the centenary celebrations of former chief minister D Devaraj Urs. The tableau by Cha-mundeshwari Electricity Supply Corporation (Cesc) educated the people on the use of solar energy and LED bulbs to save power. 

Forest Department had a tableau on protection of wildlife, Health Department highlighted the Indradhanush campaign, and introduction of motorbike ambulances, Info rmation and Public Relations Department of  depicted ‘Gandhiji Kanasu Karnatakadalli Nanasu’, Cauvery Neeravari Nigam’s tableau appealed to save precious water, Social Justice Standing Committee of Mysuru Zilla Panchayat and Mysuru Urban Development Authority (MUDA) publicised their various development activities, while several schemes implemented by the departments of Minorities, Public Instructions, Police, Revenue, Social Welfare, Women and Child Welfare and Sports and Youth Empowerment highlighted their achievements and schemes for the people. State Bank of Mysore highlighted its products, including those for farmers, through its tableau.

Cultural troupes

The cultural troupes added glitter to the procession. The artistes from across the state, unmindful of the scorching heat under their feet, enthralled the audience with their folk art.

Kodagu district topped the list with seven troupes participating in the procession. Four troupes from Mandya and five from Chamarajanagar also took part. 

A troupe from Punjab performed Bhangra while another troupe from Madhya Pradesh performed Gangovar. The remaining troupes were from Mysuru district.

The cultural troupe Veerabhadra Nrutya by Sri Kiralumahesha, Abhinavashri Veerabhadra Nritya troupe was the first to enthrall thousands of people assembled on the Palace premises. That was followed by Nadaswara by artistes from H D Kote taluk.

The caparisoned elephants Balarama, the pilot, Abhimanyu, Gopi, Prashantha, Vikram and Harsha, as usual grabbed the attention. They were followed by bullock carts carrying cannons, Veeragase by artistes from Varuna hobli, Nagari Mela by local artistes, Garudi Gombe by a troupe from Mandya, Maragalu Kunitha by Siddaraju from Nanjangud taluk ­- who was dressed like Ravana, stole the show with his 10 foot tall wooden legs.

Hulivesha by artistes from Chamarajanagar, Gorakana Nritya by artistes from Yalandur, Chamarajanagar district, Goravara Kunitha by 90-year-old Puttamallegowda and troupe, Chamarajanagar district, Puja Kunitha by Mandya district artistes, Beesu Kamsale by Nanjangud artistes, Kathiyatta by Madikeri artistes, Urtikat Aat by Madikeri artistes, Suggi Kunitha by Somwarpet taluk artistes, Somana Kunitha by Srirangapatna taluk artistes, Pata Kunitha by Pandavapura taluk artistes, Dollu Kunitha by local artistes, Beesu Kamsale by Mysuru artistes, Chandevadana by Mysuru artistes, Yakshagana by Madikeri artistes, Girijana Nritya by Kodagu artistes, Tamate Vadana by H D Kote taluk artistes, Donnevarase, Veeragase by artistes from Chamarajanagar district, Nadaswara by local artistes, Karnataka Band Gaadi, English Band by KARP Mounted Company, Mounted police, KARP Mounted Company, etc stole the  show all along the procession route.