The concept of forest or tree park is not new. But the one coming up on 80-Badagabettu area will be wonderful and mesmerising and as rich as a real forest.

The forest department has come up with an ambitious project of a forest park at a cost of Rs 1.2 crore here at 80-Badagabettu area. RFO Clifford told DH that the park is coming up on a huge space covering 275 acres of land. It will be a unique project and will be opened for public within a month. The project comprises of forest cover in 60 acres and the remaining area will have all basic facilities, he added.

The idea of tree park conceived due to ample availability of land under the forest department. The project was envisioned and the work began in December 2016.

It will be a wholesome entertainment and education package for the visitors. The aim is to create awareness among people on environment and conservation of forest. The park will comprise wide variety of saplings, which also includes exclusive medicinal plants.

The plant varieties that are planted in the park include Prickly Chaff-Flower, Red sandalwood, Sweet Flag, Sapota, Teak, Common Agrimony, Bellary Onion, Garlic, Medicinal Aloe, Aloe Vera, Indian Ginger, Poppy, Asparagus and Neem.

As part of awareness and education on the conservation of forest, the department has planned informative sign boards that provide details of the tree structures and also the details of the wildlife. The herbal garden will comprise a detailed description of the plants available in the area.

The park will also have ornamental plants which enhance the beauty of the ambience. The flora and fauna will be displayed to enhance creativity. Children’s park is another initiative designed exclusively to meet the requirements of the children.

Clifford said a walking track with lightings will be another attraction to grab the attention of the visitors. The lengthy walking track will offer the experience of walking in the midst of a thick forest enjoying fresh air. There will be sufficient rest rooms and canteens.

The resting gazebo will be designed in the midst of the trees and will be accompanied by eateries.  The compound wall with parking zones will be built.

A committee is being set up to take care of the tree park maintenance and also to decide about the minimal fee for the visitors, which will be spent on maintenance. The visitors will have a good travel experience.

The money they will be spending would be too meagre and the experience they have in the park would be amazing, he said.ADVERTISEMENT