The incidents of poaching pangolin and porcupines by inter-state poachers inside Bhadra Reserve Forest has come to light in Chikmagalur. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe incident came to light following the arrest of a poacher. 

Speaking to Deccan Herald, sources in forest department said that eight teams of poachers from Tamil Nadu have camped inside sensitive areas of the reserve forest. Officials attached to wildlife division of Lakkavalli zone had taken a member of a poachers group to custody on the grounds of suspicion. 

He had spilled the beans during interrogation and had said that eight teams have been engaged in poaching porcupine and pangolin and smuggling it in the international market.
 
International demand 

There is a great demand for pangolin and porcupine in the internationalmarket, especially in China and Japan. 

A person by name Venkatesh of Tamil Nadu is controlling the network of poachers who are active in Bhadra reserve forest. The arrested had said that pelt of porcupine is sold for Rs 50,000.

Sources said that the habitats of porcupines and pangolins have been destroyed by the poachers to poach at Aanegundi Road, Mavinahalla, Sukalatti, Hulikere road, Karanji Checkpost and surrounding areas. Poachers have also poached in Hebbe range as well. The poachers have been reportedly hiding inside caves at Devarakallugudda. 

There are evidences of killing deer, wild sheep and consuming it inside the caves. 
The wildlife division staff has found the carcass of a pangolin inside the forest on Tuesday.

 “Though the officials had tried to nab poachers, their efforts have gone in vain,” said sources. Inspite of having 32 anti poaching camps, the poachers are continuing their activities inside the reserve forest, complain environmentalists.

 “Poaching of pangolin has been confirmed and one accused has been held. The forest department staff have been directed to start an operation to arrest all the poachers,” said wildlife division forest conservator Krishna Udupudi.