Every once in a while, when the moon is bright on a Saturday night, I wish to take a long ride on a winding road. More often than not, the journey becomes inevitable, not for the destination, but for the sheer pleasure of getting out and travelling. 

ADVERTISEMENTThere is no list of sights to be viewed or a meticulous itinerary to be followed. And if there could only be a dash of adventure, the experience is sure going to be unique. It was with this feeling that two of us embarked on a biking ride to the Blue Mountains.

Blue Mountains or the Nilgiris, the spectacular mountain chain that forms a link between the Eastern and Western Ghats, has many a towering peak and endless vistas of gorges and valleys, which can be viewed from the hill stations of Ooty, Coonoor and Kotagiri. The roads leading to these hills are also equally scenic. With the possibility of sighting some wildlife on the way, the instant choice of travel for us was to drive there.

We chose to start at nightfall, well after the peak-hour traffic had subsided. With the cool wind breezing overhead, it was a smooth ride along the all-too-familiar stretch. Resting overnight, we hit the road in the morning and geared up for adventure. Not being in a hurry, the frequent stops enabled an enjoyable ride. As the forests of Bandipur neared, we slowed down, not only because the road was winding, but also to avoid startling the occasional deer or gaur that crossed our way. We did take a peek at a couple of spotted deers and a peacock as we crossed over to Mudumalai.

 The preferred road from here to Ooty was via Masinagudi, as the stretch is more pristine and isolated; it also saves some 35 km from the other route via Gudalur. This road also has its thrills with steep curves and switchbacks on 36 hairpin bends one encounters on their way up. With a steady gain of altitude, the vistas opened up. Passing by the Bison Valley viewpoint, which affords sweeping views of the Glen Morgan, we stopped by the Kalhatty Falls. The waterfalls was only a trickle, as the monsoon was yet to arrive.

Reaching Ooty by late afternoon, we called it a day. The bright and salubrious morning was conducive for a drive towards Coonoor, the lesser-visited hill station. The aim was to escape the Ooty crowd, but Coonoor was no better. But the roads were fortunately deserted and the option of stopping frequently and for as long as necessary made it all the more exhilarating. The sloping fields of lush green tea estates and a clear blue sky filled the eyes almost everywhere as we drove towards the Lamb’s Rock. Named after an officer of the Raj period, this viewpoint, perched atop a rocky outcrop, offers stunning views. Most of the sights in Coonoor like Sim’s Park, Dolphin’s Nose and Lady Canning’s seat, etc, are all named after erstwhile British officers. 

Paying a customary visit to these spots, we had a fabulous view of St Catherine Falls, far away in the hills. The sprawling acres of Sim’s Park, with a small lake and paragolas, are rejuvenating. Before ending the day’s journey, one long ride took us to Kodanad view point, located beyond Kotagiri. But the tall pillars of Rangaswamy peak were hardly discernible through the thick layer of mist. 

The Nilgiris with innumerable lakes and reservoirs can aptly be called the lake district. But many of them are in reserve forests and visiting them entails formalities. Emerald Reservoir to the western flanks of Ooty was the one we chose to drive towards. Once there, we were gifted with a postcard view of the blue lake surrounded by gentle hills. 
On the way back, we took another break at Pykara Dam to catch a glimpse of the lovely water body amidst the hills of Mukurthi National Park, followed by a long exhaustive ride back.