The Centre’s move comes at a time when the State Government is showing urgency to permit KIOCL restart mining in the Western Ghats.

In apparent violation of the Supreme Court order to close down the mining operation, the State Government has hinted at resuming mining operations there. Chief Minister B S Yeddyurappa was firm in his decision to restart mining operations stating that he is ready to ‘fight for their cause to restart the mining for KIOCL.’

In favour of reopening

The State Minister for Environment, Krishna Palemar has always been in favour of reopening the mining company. On January 2006, when he was an MLA, he had blamed the inefficiency of the State and Central governments for the closure of KIOCL. 

He is said to have shown interest in restarting the operations recently after he became the minister.  However the official sources in WII told Deccan Herald that the proposal to make KIOCL, the research centre was submitted to the  Ministry of Environment and Forests way back in March 3, 2010 and the same was approved and forwarded to the Planning Commission on  June 29, 2010. 

“It will be the regional centre of WII and is aimed at the research of wildlife in the region,” said Biswajit Mohanty,  Member, Governing Body, WII.

He said that the Centre to be set up here will focus on the study of Western Ghats species and Rain forests. 

It could be recalled that on October, 30, 2002 the Supreme Court based on a petition filed by Wildlife First, ordered the stoppage of mining in the eco-sensitive rain forests of Kudremukh in the Western Ghats and directed that all mining activities will cease on 31st December, 2005.

It also rejected the Review Application on 29th November, 2005. On 15th December, 2005 the Supreme Court even dismissed a Curative Petition (the last legal option) seeking continuation of mining.

About WII

Established in 1982 at Dehradun, Wildlife Institute of India (WII) is an internationally acclaimed Institution, which offers training programme, academic courses and advisory in wildlife research and management. 

The Institute is actively engaged in research across the breadth of the country on biodiversity related issues.

The Institute aims at building up scientific knowledge on wildlife resources, train personnel at various level for conservation and management of wildlife. 

The Institute is also entrusted with the job to carry out research relevant to management including the development of techniques appropriate to Indian conditions and provide information and advice on specific wildlife management problems.
ADVERTISEMENT