Javagal Srinath - International Cricket Council match referee

Javagal Srinath was one of those Indian bowlers who infused the fear of pace in rival teams. Quintessentially Karnataka’s boy-next-door, Javagal spearheaded India’s pace attack for 12 years before moving on.

ADVERTISEMENTHe was always a passionate promoter of technology in sports and played an important role in bringing technology into Indian cricket.  At present, he is the International Cricket Council (ICC) match referee. Javagal gets talking about the many things that have shaped him.

1 Theatre and cinema - Amitabh Bachchan

I am not a big movie buff but I’ve always enjoyed watching movies of Dr Rajkumar, Vishnuvardhan, Amitabh Bachchan and Shah Rukh Khan. I sometimes go to watch the plays at Ranga Shankara.

I find theatre a powerful medium of communication and the sense of involvement is also intense. The pure expressions and dialogues on stage are more profound than what we see in cinema.

2  Music - M Balamuralikrishna

At home, my sisters were learning music. So our home always resonated with Carnatic music. I grew up in Mysuru and we used to attend the concerts during the Ramanavami Music Festival.

I would also accompany my parents to the concerts at the Durbar Hall in the Mysore Palace. The concert by M Balamuralikrishna was the highlight of these festivals. Old numbers by Kishore Kumar keep me in high spirits.

3  Travel - Coorg

Coorg, Ooty and Kabini Wildlife Sanctuary have always been my favourite hotspots. Wildlife has always interested me. By virtue of playing cricket, I have had the opportunity to visit several places across the world and get an insight into different cultures.

I believe that an exposure to different world cultures makes one more knowledgeable and compassionate.

4 Author - William Dalrymple 

I took to reading books a little late. Reading has influenced my way of thinking and has enriched my perspective towards a lot of things in my life. I read a lot of autobiographies. At present, I am reading ‘The Last Mughal’ by William Dalrymple.
I have found works by Gurcharan Das very thought-provoking. I lay my hands on any piece of good writing and literature. I am not a good judge of books and buy books only after speaking and discussing with a few voracious readers.

5 Philosophy - Religious teachings

Religious beliefs and teachings tend to bring a philosophical dimension in oneself. I have been brought up on the principles of the Advaita philosophy. As a child, I was made to understand and align the religious practices to the values of the world. Philosophy helps you gain a critical understanding of people around you and various situations.

6 Cuisine - ‘Masala Dosa’

I grew up on a staple diet of ‘anna-sambar’ which is what I like more than anything else. ‘Masala Dosa’ is another favourite. I always enjoy having a crisp ‘masala dosa’ at any of the popular restaurants wherever I am and I am so addicted to it that I get into some sort of depression when I don’t get my regular share of it.

Even when I am travelling overseas, I make it a point to look out for Indian restaurants. I’ve tried my hand at cooking when I lived in England for a while but I can’t really call myself a great cook.

7 Inspiration - J K Chandrashekar

It may sound a little cliched but my father J K Chandrashekar has been my inspiration and mother Bhagyalakshmi has always been a disciplinarian. C S Subramanium, the then secretary of the Mysore Gymkhana Cricket Club,  continues to be my mentor even to this day. I feel it is good to have such mentors who reflect the absolute reality of life.

(As told to Nina C George)