Every now and then, there are exhortations by the Bannerghatta National Park (BNP) authorities urging animal lovers to adopt the sanctuary’s wild animals. One such recent missive brought to memory paradoxical events of that sun-drenched afternoon more than a quarter of a century ago, when we were adopted... well, almost, by a lion.

ADVERTISEMENTThose days we could drive into the lion-tiger safari in our own cars. The only apparent watch on our conduct and safety was the accompanying lathi-armed forest guide. The authorities were far liberal then as there were no inspections of our vehicle and its road worthiness. 

So, Pegasus with its missing passenger window and a top speed of 25 km was permitted to amble on into the safari. Pegasus was our beloved black, battered, weather-beaten standard herald car – quite temperamental, with a penchant to sulk at will. When Pegasus sulked, a gentle nudge on the back by us, three  huffing-puffing kids, was just what was needed for him to whimper back to life. 

And thus, Pegasus sputtered into the safari and our zealous guide Teja, perched in the passenger’s seat, let forth a constant chatter eulogising the safari denizens – its bats, birds, wildlife, food habits of lions and tigers and so on. His rhapsody was punctured by sightings of a deer here, a sloth bear there and reached a crescendo when we stumbled upon a pride of lions sunning themselves on a grassy patch. 

Of all the places it was here that Pegasus decided to enter into a deep sulk and refused to budge despite pleas. Discernibly, a gentle nudge could not be given and we were left stranded amidst siestaing lions. An auburn-maned lion and a group of lionesses looked at us as we sat quivering inside a stubborn Pegasus in uncomfortable silence. 

The lion got up and moved inquiringly towards Pegasus. “Sir, glassu,” Teja croaked searching in vain for the handle that could have raised the window of the passenger seat. Father, through a mixture of muted words and gestures, managed to convey to him that the window had no glass since time immemorial and neither could it be fixed. However, he gallantly offered to exchange places but Teja was too stunned to respond.

Meanwhile, the lion stood at about two feet from us gazing intently. Father was trying to urge Pegasus on but was met with stony silence. My mother held onto us children. But it was really Teja who displayed extraordinary presence of mind. He let forth mantras and shlokas invoking all the Gods he knew in a quivering strain.

As the lion continued to survey us, one of the lionesses got up aggressively approaching us. We feared the worst. Then, all of a sudden, the lion started to walk away. His lack of interest, arrested the approach of the lioness and soon the entire pride moved away following him. 
 
Phew! Inspired by the entire ordeal, Pegasus suddenly cheered up and spluttered on, as we kids hurrahed in joy. Teja, though, continued dazedly muttering prayers. As we reached the safari gates, he hastily pocketed the handsome tip proffered and jumped off with an alacrity that would have made the lions he was extolling a short while ago, very proud.

Recently, we went to BNP with my daughter. She was disappointed on being enclosed in a gargantuan truck with grilled windows during the safari ride. ‘Where are the lions and tigers? How can I see them through these suffocating bars?” she implored. “This is so unadventurous,” she surmised. I could not help but smile recallinf our wilder adve-nture while my mother’s eyes misted ov-er, thanking the lion which had saved her family by adopting them, albeit briefly.