Bengaluru, dhns: The forest department has called for applications from volunteers to help them befriend local residents in and around forest areas.ADVERTISEMENTThe department feels that it will help understand problems faced by local residents, besides roping them in containing forest fire.  "It is a dry season and forests are vulnerable. We do not want the forest fire havoc which the state saw in January in Bandipur Tiger Reserve (BTR) to repeat," a senior forest official said.Over 100 acres of forest in Gundre and Kalkere range was gutted. By the end of February, 2,500 hectares of forest was gutted in BTR alone. A forester also died while trying to control the fire in BTR in January. Forest Minister Ramanath Rai had ordered a CID probe in the matter. But the report is yet to be prepared."It is known that forest fires are man-made. If locals are employed and involved with the department, forests face less threat. Through volunteers, we are communicating with communities and understanding their problems. We are also making them realise the importance of forests," the official said.The department wants to emulate the Gopalaswamy Betta range example everywhere. No fire incident has been reported there in the past five years. This is because the range forest officer there has built a close bond with locals and engages them in various activities. Earlier, through eco-development committees, foresters would interact with locals. But now, these committees are promoted only when projects are to be implemented. During interactions, locals have told volunteers that they need proper roads, electricity, land and loan exemptions.The department, on its website, invited volunteers three months ago. But so far, merely 20 volunteers, including techies from Bengaluru, have volunteered to work on weekends. They have shown interest in the forests of BR Hills, Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary, Bannerghatta National Park, Bandipur and Nagarhole tiger reserves. To attract more volunteers, the department has promised free accommodation and free bus safari. Some are also engaging with staffers at checkposts, to enforce night traffic ban, snare combing and interacting with schoolchildren through eco-clubs.