Minister for Forest, Environment and Ecology, Ramanath Rai said that the state government has formulated the programme ‘Keregalannu Matte Tarona’ – or ‘Bring back lakes’ – towards the rejuvenation of lakes in the state. 

The programme is being organised through the Department of Urban Development Department and Lake Development and Conservation Authority. Rai was speaking to mediapersons on the occasion of Vanamahothsava programme, organised by DK District Working Journalists’ Association and Forest Department, at Circuit House premises in Kadri on Monday. 

With companies
The government will tie-up with corporate houses to develop lakes. In Bengaluru, companies have come forward to develop 12 lakes. The programme will be implemented by all City Corporations and one lake will be developed under each City Corporation. The detailed project report for the development of Madiwalakere and Agraharakere has been complete and work will be taken up at costs of Rs 24 crore and Rs 18 crore respectively, said the minister.

“In Ballari too, Jindal company has come forwards to develop a lake. The companies will be laid a condition not to carry out commercial activities. Until now, the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board was not entitled to release any funds. For the first time, however, the KSPCB has provided Rs 100 crore to the BBMP for the development of lakes,” the minister cited an example.

In the days to come, lake wardens will be appointed similar to that of wildlife wardens, who will take care of the lake. The Cabinet has made the decision on the same, Rai said.

Afforestation 
The minister added that the Forest Department has organised a programme where organisations and institutions can book saplings, after enrolling themselves with the Forest Department. The Department will maintain the saplings for one year and hand them over to the organisations. Temples, churches and mosques can enrol in the programme. He said that under the Krishi Aranya Prothsaha Karyakrama, a farmer will be given Rs 10 per sapling in the first year, Rs 15 in the second year and Rs 20 in the third year, if the sapling is grown and looked after properly. 

“Also, as per the Hasiru Grama programme, Rs 25 lakh is allotted for a village towards green projects. Gobar gas, gas stove and solar light facilities will be provided to the households living near the reserve forest. Similarly, the Hasiru Shale programme is chalked out to provide drinking water facility through electric pumps in schools. Last year, Ariyadka in Puttur was selected as the green village, or Hasiru Grama, and Sarapadi school was selected under Hasiru Shale (green school) scheme. ‘Deyi Baidethi Hasiru Vana’ developed at a cost of Rs 60 lakh at Padumale, the birthplace of Koti-Chennaya – the historic twin heroes of Tulunadu – is ready for inauguration,” he said. ADVERTISEMENT
The minister planted a sapling at Circuit House premises and said that the conservation of environment is the duty of every individual. “If the balance of ecosystem is disturbed, we have to face the ire of nature. These days were have been seeing a lot of such calamities such as rise in temperature, less rainfall and so on. Awareness is being spread at global-level, against the adverse affects of deforestation and imbalance in ecosystem. The Department of Environment too, has been carrying out various awareness programmes in this regard,” he added. 

Bantwal Urban Development Authority President Piyush, ZP member Chandraprakash Shetty, Mangaluru City Corporation leader in Opposition Roopa Bangera, DK District Working Journalists’ Association President Jagannath Shetty Bala and Regional Forest Officer Shridhar Adhikari were present.