The rising mercury level and the power crisis have become a cause of concern as they are likely to hit the drinking water supply in the district.

ADVERTISEMENTBesides, the man-animal conflict is expected to rise as minor water sources in villages on the fringes of the forest are fast depleting. Such water bodies are the main drinking water source for tribals, resulting in a turf war between the tribals and wild animals, which stray in search of water and food.

There are many small ponds in the villages situated in the BRT range, Cauvery Wildlife and MM Hill sanctuaries, which are used for drinking and other purposes by the people residing in tribal hamlets. 

If the water sources in the deep forests dry up, wild elephants like bison and deer stray into the villages in search of water.

Power crisis

The prevailing shortage of power has also resulted in water crisis in the rural areas. According to people in rural areas, borewells have been sunk but water is not supplied to tanks and ponds due to insufficient power.

But, officials of gram panchayats say that there is no drinking water problem in the district as of now. As a precautionary measure, a list of villages which may face water problems in the next six months has been prepared.

There will be no problem as funds have been released under drought relief pack-age to tackle drinking water crisis and to take up drin-king water projects. Water would be supplied through tankers to the affected areas if there is any such problem, they said.
About 214 borewells have been sunk under Chamun- deshwari Electricity Supply Corporation limits in Kolle-gal and Chamarajanagar taluks. 

Even as the fiscal year is coming to an end, power connection to the borewells has not been given. Though the issue was discussed during the Karnataka Development Programme (KDP) meeting of the Zilla Panchayat, there have been no results. However, temporary power has been supplied to a few borewells to supply drinking water, officials said.

Speaking to Deccan Herald, Cesc Executive Engineer Devaraju attributed the delay in supplying power to some technical problems. 

A proposal has been submitted for electrification of 214 borewells, seeking Rs 6.63 crore, he said.