The Union Environment and Forest Ministry has notified 600 sq km of area housing 107 villages as the eco-sensitive zone for the Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary that spread over three districts.
 
The August 22 Gazette notification comes almost 16 months after the publication of the draft notification, seeking comments from people on the proposal to create an eco-sensitive sensitive zone around the reserved forest.
 
The 600.7 sq km area around the park houses 72 revenue villages and 35 forest villages. The forest, spread over an area of 1027.53 sq km, touches three districts – Ramanagara, Chamrajnaagara and Mandya. It is also a part of the Mysore elephant reserve.
 
The notification prohibits 10 commercial and developmental activities in the eco-sensitive zone while restricting 30 other activities, official sources said.
 
The prohibited activities include commercial mining; establishing polluting industries, hydroelectric projects, production of hazardous substances, discharge of untreated effluents and setting up of solid waste disposal and incineration units.
 
Other banned activities are setting up of commercial livestock and poultry units, new saw mills, brick kilns and a complete stop on the commercial use of fire wood.
 
The regulated activities would include commercial hotel business. While no new commercial hotels and resorts are permitted within one km of the boundary of the protected area, small temporary structures could be allowed for eco-tourism if they are in conformity of the tourism master plan.
 
Some of the other regulated activities are construction, felling of trees, vehicle traffic at night, infrastructure build up and use of polythene bags. The state government will also have to prepare a zonal master plan.
 
A 12-member monitoring committee, headed by the Resident Commissioner, Mysore and having the three local MLAs among the members, has been constituted for an effective monitoring of the eco-sensitive zone for the next three years.
 
Any commercial proposal dealing with any of the 30 restricted activities, has to be first approved by the monitoring panel. It would also have to submit an annual action taken the report to the Chief Wildlife Warden.
 
Exactly a month back, the green ministry came out with the draft notification on the proposed eco-sensitive zone around the Nagarahole tiger reserve in Mysore and Kodagu districts, fixing the buffer zone boundary for the park.
 
Out of 39 protected areas in Karnataka, only Bandipur Tiger Reserve had a defined eco-sensitive zone boundary.