End semester practical examinations are round the corner in most of the colleges. Utter confusion prevails among biology teachers over the last two years since the University Grants Commission (UGC) directed institutions of higher learning to ban animal dissections in the academic year 2011-12. 

ADVERTISEMENTOwing to lack of clarity in policy, some colleges continued with their practice of dissections, while many discontinued the same. Thus in this practical examination season different colleges follow different patterns and the academic community is divided in opinion over this issue. 

The UGC expert committee which recommended the ban opines that due to the over-emphasis of learning the anatomy as laboratory exercises scores of valuable animals are being expunged. Earlier when only a few higher learning institutions existed with a considerably smaller number of students, the requirement of animals for dissections was correspondingly lower. But now with the proliferation of such institutions and over a million students the demand for animals has become proportionately higher. The question is does such a move impact learning biology or not?  

Colleges offering courses in biological sciences are worried whether their intake in these subjects will come down in the forthcoming years due to this ban on a traditional tool of learning biology. It offers hands on experience to handle and cut animals to examine their anatomy. Clearly teachers are concerned about student’s inability to acquire dissection skills. Conversely students experience a sense of denial of an experience that the older generations talk about.  

Steps taken

In January 2010 the UGC constituted a committee to examine the issue of animal dissection. The guide lines regarding the ban on dissection which were posted on the UGC website on November 24, 2011 recommends that all institutions of higher education have to strictly adhere to the Wild Life Protection Act, 1972 and the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960. However realising the laxity in approach towards these guidelines; in 2012 the UGC has communicated individually to these institutions seeking explanations on steps taken to control the practice of animal dissections in life science laboratories.

Most animals used in dissection are caught from the wild, and their indiscriminate removal from the natural habitats disrupts the biodiversity and ecological balance. 
The UGC guidelines specifically state that all institutions of higher education have to constitute ‘Dissection Monitoring Committees’ (DMC) to focus on the use of animals. For both under graduate and post graduate programmes, there shall be reduction in the number of animals for dissection and experimentation as well as in the number of species with all ethical considerations.

 According to the guidelines, undergraduate science courses will hereafter not use animals during experimentation and for class work. However, cutting open of one species for demonstration purpose by faculty is allowed. Here too preference shall be given to laboratory bred animals. In tune with this, the curriculum needs to be re-tailored to encourage students to undertake more field work which involves observation, identification and documentation of animals.

Worried about the waning standard of Life science education without dissections, many academics opined that the use of animals for education should be reduced only gradually over a period of five years and a total ban should be avoided for now. Experts postulate that while the UGC bans the use of animal of any kind for dissection, the Wildlife Protection Act only prohibits the use of endangered species. 
On the other hand there are also opinions from experts that the move will save the lives of thousands of animals. According to rough estimates, the total number of undergraduate life sciences students in our country exceeds 1.5 million. If the students use on an average two animals, the move will save almost 18 million animals per academic session. The committee has recommended the use of modern techniques like models, multimedia computer-based simulators, mannequins and virtual labs for educating the students on animal anatomy. 

Though banning dissections can stifle improvement of manual skills in handling and cutting animals; the suggestion to include more and more field studies can definitely improve various other skills that students fail to develop today. It is a great way to infuse excitement and adventure in learning by improving their power of observation, team spirit, analytical mindset and compassion for animals. Thus in the present scenario, the banning of dissections and inclusion of field studies under biology practical is a welcome move and the academic community has to accept the decision wholeheartedly. Moreover the UGC has to further strongly implement the rules regarding the ban through strict inspections and monitoring.