Wasps paralyse a poisonous spider

An Australian wasp provides an important service to humans, researchers report: It paralyses a poisonous spider, the redback. Although female wasps sting and paralyse the spiders, they don’t kill them, said Andrew Austin, an evolutionary biologist at the University of Adelaide in Australia and an author of a new study on the wasp in The Australian Journal of Entomology.

 “The female wasp drags the spider back to a crevice or burrow,” he said. “She lays an egg on it and when the egg hatches, the wasp larvae have a fresh spider to feed on.”

The wasp, agenioideus nigricornis, was first described in 1775 by the Danish entomologist Johan Christian Fabricius. He looked at samples of the spider brought back by James Cook’s voyage to Australia. Since then, the wasp has largely been ignored by scientists though it is found throughout Australia. ADVERTISEMENTSeveral years ago, Austin and his colleague Lars Krogmann, of the State Museum of Natural History in Stuttgart, Germany, became interested in a closer study of spider-hunting wasps in Australia. Many species of wasps hunt spiders, Austin said, but little was known about the ones in Australia. 

Two years ago a citizen scientist in Western Australia, Florian Irwin (then nine years old), observed the wasp dragging a spider back to its nest in his yard. Florian’s father took a picture of the wasp and the spider and shared it, along with the specimens, with the Western Australian Museum in Perth. The museum sent the information to Austin and Krogmann, since they were studying the wasps. 

All the colours that set this monkey apart!

Scientists have identified a new species of African monkey whose colouring “is unlike anything I’ve ever seen,” as one of them put it. The monkey, known by people in the Democratic Republic of Congo as the lesula, has a blond chin and upper chest, in contrast to its dark limbs. It has a reddish-coloured lower back and tail.

“And adult males have a huge bare patch of skin in the buttocks, testicles and perianal area,” said John A. Hart, the researcher who described the colouring. “It’s a brilliant blue, really pretty spectacular.” Hart is a field scientist with the Lukuru Foundation, a wildlife research group; his colleagues include his wife, Terese Hart.

 They report their findings in the journal PLoS One. The researchers found that the monkeys live in the central part of the Democratic Republic of Congo and have a range of about 6,500 square miles. The first lesula seen by researchers was the pet of a schoolgirl. It bore a strong resemblance to another species, the owl-faced monkey, but the unusual colouring made the researchers suspect it was something new. They were able to identify more lesulas in the wild and find hunters with specimens of the monkey. They analysed tissue samples to confirm that the lesula is in fact genetically distinct from other species.