National carrier Air India has come up with various packages for the flyers which includes a discount of 10 per cent if the tickets are booked from India to any of the destinations covered by the airlines.

British Airways has announced special offers for Indian students travelling abroad, including a Matrix sim card with some free talk time and allowing them to carry an extra piece of luggage weighing up to 23 kgs in addition to the permitted checked in allowance. 

These offers are valid till November 15.

The airline's Regional Commercial Manager Judy Jarvis said a similar initiative was very well-received last year and was hence being offered this year again.

Wooing holiday-goers, UAE carrier Emirates Airline has introduced a special package called 'Summer Smiles in Dubai' that includes 50 per cent discount on fares for upto two children under 12 years.ADVERTISEMENTThree nights stay for children, meals and play in Dubai is absolutely free when they are travelling with two paying adults, said Emirates' Regional Manager (India) Vinay Malhotra. 

Besides the Dubai-based carrier is offering an attractive companion fare for business class passengers and free stays for two or one night at a top-class hotel in Dubai for First and Business class travellers, he said, adding that most of the hotels were also participating in this package.

The travellers would also get free or discounted coupons for shopping or free metro rides in Dubai.

Similarly, Gulf's low cost carrier Air Arabia has come up with a limited period special package to Kenya for a wildlife safari. The package price starts from Rs 49,500 per person on twin sharing from six cities in India.

Kenya has in recent times gained lot of popularity and is perceived as a very good tourist option for nature and wildlife lovers.

Similarly, Etihad Airways has launched BusinessConnect loyalty programme in India targeting the small and medium business persons. The programme includes benefits like free flights, upgrades and large number of items available through the online rewards shop.

The offers are timed to attract the growing holiday and business travel markets out of India.