The Anshi-Dandeli tiger reserve will now be called the Kali tiger reserve. The name of the youngest tiger reserve was changed through a gazette notification dated December 11.

ADVERTISEMENTThe government order was signed by S P Patil, the under secretary of the Forest, Ecology and Environment department. The two forests were declared as one tiger reserve on January 4, 2007. 

Speaking to Deccan Herald, Srinivasalu, Chief Conservator of Forests, Dandeli wildlife circle, said that though, on the ground, nothing changes for the forest patches, changing the name changes a lot of things. 

River Kali is the lifeline of the people of Uttara Kannada district and integrates Dandeli Wildlife Sanctuary (DWS) spread across 400 sq km and Anshi National Park (ANP) spread across 500 sq km. The river cuts across the whole park. 

From now on, there will be no two identities, but one. With the change of name, importance will be given to River Kali. Generally, nature tourism is associated with rivers and Kali will add brand value to the reserve. 

River Kali is 185-km long and passes through the DWS and ANP, before joining the Arabian Sea. The river is very popular for the hornbills breeding around it, for the crocodiles and white water river rafting. The tiger reserve is home to over 20 breeding tigers, as per the latest tiger census report. It is the best place to see hornbills breeding. 

Srinivasalu said that this was not the first tiger reserve to be named after water bodies. There are also others like Bhadra, Nagarahole, Pench and Kanha. The change of name will surely do value addition to tourism. 

Tourist footfall is encouraging in the State’s forests, he said. In the last one year, the department has increased its revenue from Rs 98 lakh to Rs 2.3 crore. 

While Nagarahole and Bandipur tiger reserves are popular for wildlife tourism, the Kali tiger reserve is famous for nature tourism. The Kali reserve will hold its first bird festival called ‘Hakki Habba’ from January 8 to 10 next year.