At a time when protests are marring several science and defence projects at Challakere in Chitradurga, it has come to light that the Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) is planning a radar-testing range at Yelwara in Kolar district, on a single patch of forest land measuring 140 hectares.

ADVERTISEMENTDocuments available with Deccan Herald reveal that the area is home to unique species of wildlife, including peacock and black buck, which have been categorised as near-threatened by the International Union for Conservation of Nature.

According to a site inspection report submitted by a Deputy Conservator of Forests (Central) in June 2012, wildlife residing in the proposed project site include, black buck, spotted deer, black bear, leopard, wildcat and peacock.

In a note, K S Reddy, Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Central), had noted: “...Presently, the area of the existing establishment of DRDO is covered by a compound wall, except for the forest part. If the safety of people/animal is the only consideration, the same can be achieved by fencing the forest area on the external side at DRDO’s cost. The forestry operations can be carried out when radar systems are not in operation.”

“... Hence, there is no justification for diversion of forest land for the project,” he said in the note written to the Additional Director General of Forests, Union Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF), in October 2012.

DRDO is planning to establish a radar evaluation and field-testing range to test radars and sub-systems in the proposed site, located around the existing Electronics and Radar Development Establishment (LRDE), a lab under DRDO.

In an application seeking the required approvals, LRDE has said it currently has 951 acres of land, including 561 acres of private land acquired recently.

“...The various sub-systems developed by DRDO are complex and have to be tested and field-evaluated to ascertain the performance at different stages of development for which we require a clear area of one-kilometre radius from the positioning of the radar,” the application said.

It added that it was due to this that 346 acres (140 hectares) of forest land (survey number 136 of Yelwara village) need to be transferred to DRDO.

“We also hereby undertake that our project activities will not affect/disturb the vegetation in this area as we do not intend to do any civil/construction activities and confine the land only for equipment-testing purposes,” LRDE maintains.

Further, according to documents provided by sources in the Union Ministry of Environment and Forest, the ministry has granted an ‘in-principle’ approval for the project.

“After careful consideration of the proposal, the Central government hereby agrees in principle for diversion of the forest land for DRDO’s project activities...” H C Chaudhary, Assistant Inspector General of Forest, MoEF, Forest Clearance Division, said in an order dated January 29.