Heavy rain continued to lash Gujarat on Wednesday as depression over the Arabian Sea crossed the state coast late on Tuesday evening. While there was relief for Mumbai from the torrential showers, the monsoon reached Jammu and Kashmir, where temperature dipped.

ADVERTISEMENTMany villages in Saurashtra region of Gujarat were marooned due to incessant rains ranging from 5 to 15 inches in the last 24 hours across the region. The weather claimed as many as 34 lives on Wednesday, according to a PTI report.

One of the worst-affected in Saurashtra region was Amreli district. At least a dozen villages were cut off from the rest of the country. The state also deployed two IAF helicopters, two NDRF teams and four companies of State Reserve Police for rescue and relief operations in villages where water levels were on the rise.

Other than  Amreli, heavy rains lashed other districts of Rajkot, which, too, received about 203 mm rain in the last 24 hours. The coastal town of Una in Gir Somnath district received as much as 360 mm overnight, while Talala village near Gir wildlife sanctuary recorded 288 mm and Malia Hatina in Junagadh district received 279 mm rain, throwing normal life off gear. Many dams in Saurashtra continued to overflow much above danger level. Many parts also went without electricity due to rains.

Mercury dips in J&K

As heavy rains lashed most parts of Jammu and Kashmir valley on Wednesday weathermen have forecast more rain and thundershowers over the next three days. A local MeT official said they were expecting light to moderate rainfall accompanied by thundershowers in the state during the next 24 hours and the weather is likely to improve by Saturday evening. “There will be isolated and scattered rains on Friday and Saturday and decrease in precipitation afterwards,” he added.

Officials of Irrigation and Flood Control department said water level in Valley’s main waterway—Jhelum and its tributaries—is normal. The 294-km long Srinagar-Jammu national highway and 434-km Srinagar-Leh national highway were open for traffic, officials said.

Due to the intermittent rain since last evening, several roads in Srinagar were water-logged on Wednesday, causing hardships to commuters. The rains also resulted in the dip in the temperature by a few degrees. Srinagar recorded minimum temperature of 16.2 degrees Celsius while minimum temperature in ski resort Gulmarg in north Kashmir was 8.5 degrees and in Pahalgam hill resort of south Kashmir 10.4 degrees.

Relief for Mumbai

After nearly a week of heavy rain, Mumbaikars got some relief on Wednesday when the road and rail traffic was completely normal. Traffic on the major highways continued to be slow than normal. There were light drizzles in some areas of the Mumbai Metropolitan Region. About 250 trees were uprooted because of strong winds from Tuesday. Over the last week, more than 700 trees were uprooted in the MMR. The Met office has forecast rains for Thursday.