St Aloysius College Management and St Aloysius College Alumni Association (SACAA) will jointly organise a programme to confer ‘Eminent Aloysian Alumni Award 2016’ at the Fr L F Rasquinha Hall, LCRI Block of St Aloysius College on March 19 at 5.30 pm.

ADVERTISEMENTAddressing a press conference here on Thursday, College Principal Rev Fr Swebert D’Silva said that eminent jury has selected five eminent Aloysians for the award. The award winners are Prof B S Raman, Dr K P Rao, Thumbay Moideen, Dr K Ullas Karanth and Walter D’Souza. Thumbay Moideen will deliver the conclave address on this special day.

St Aloysius College Principal Rev Fr Swebert D’Silva will give the felicitation speech. Rev Fr Denzil Lobo, Rector of St Aloysius Institutions will preside over the function.

Teacher and writer

Prof B S Raman is the author of the best selling reference books in commerce and management. He served St Aloysius College, Mangaluru, for 35 years as a lecturer of commerce. He was instrumental in establishing the Business Management Department, Teachers Credit Co-operative Society and the staff association at St Aloysius College.

Scientist

Dr K P Rao is a recipient of the prestigious ‘Nadoja’ award for his contributions towards the development of software to use Kannada language on computers. He has served as scientific officer, Atomic Energy Establishment Trombay, (BARC) and has taught at MIT, MIC Manipal, IIT Bombay and IIT Guwahati.

Businessman

Thumbay Moideen is the founder of the Thumbay Group at UAE. He established the Gulf Medical University in UAE. In a span of 16 years, he has set up various business operations in 13 sectors including hospitals, medical centres, diagnostic centres, health clubs, pharmacies, retail outlets, coffee shops and nutrition stores.

Environmentalist

Dr K Ullas Karanth is one of the world’s foremost authorities on tigers and is a senior conservation scientist and director of the US based Wildlife Conservation Society - India Programme. Dr Karanth is currently rendering his service at the Nagarhole National Park, India.

Exporter

Walter D’Souza, a Mangaluru-based exporter, is the managing partner of M/s Fernandes Brothers, one of the leading exporter of cashew and an export house recognized by Ministry of Commerce, Government of India. He is the Chairman of the Federation of Indian Export Organizations (FIEO) Southern Region.