As a first time visitor to the kids’ carnival, Khushboo Maheshwari was concerned whether the live reptiles would be safe for her nine-year-old daughter to handle. 

The instructor assured her that they are non venomous snakes and completely safe for children. 

Concerns like these were addressed at the wildlife zone by Wildlife SOS at the recently held Krackerjack Karnival. The stall which aimed at teaching people how to handle reptiles like snakes and lizards, in an initiative to create awareness about wildlife conservation and its importance in the society, was a hit with the kids and their parents.

“I really wanted to create a mega expo cum festival catering purely to children and their needs. The premise is to bring the whole family together where there is something for everyone – activities, food, entertainment, shopping on the same platform which they don’t get to experience otherwise,” organiser Chandrika Behl, project director, Exhibitions India Group told Metrolife.

“At a time when both parents are working, there is hardly a family-only time. I feel this is disconnecting families, especially the nuclear families,” she added.

With the theme, ‘Shop. Learn. Play’, the sixth edition of the two-day event witnessed kids indulging in experiential learning  activities through creative sessions on pottery, object painting, clay modelling,  face painting, looms making, cartooning, storytelling, creative writing and entertaining sports like safe archery, jockey rides and trackless trains. 

While some clicked photos with cartoon characters like Chhota Bheem and friends, Gizmo from Superbook, Shiva, Motu Patlu, Oggy from Nickelodean  in the ‘Meet and Greet sessions’, others chose to watch the various science experiments conducted on stage and music parades at various spots or simply soak in the sun.  

Visibly enthusiastic families along with their energetic kids started trooping-in even before the gates had opened-up, for a fun-filled family getaway. 

After a walk through over 140 stalls at the exhibit, four-year-old Atharv Agarwal enjoyed most of his time at the robotics creative corner. His father, Suti Kumar Agarwal mentioned, “We came to know of this event through Facebook and decided to come all the way from Ghaziabad. The variety, from workshops to activities to shopping for children is very thoughtful. In fact, seeing my son, I am also enjoying like a kid.”

The carnival also had Christmas special dance performances by preschoolers from the Shermrock Preschools Futuristic Schools. ADVERTISEMENTMeenal Arora, executive director said, “Every year parents and children look forward to Christmas-related activity and fun. So, it’s one way of engaging our children to not just make them learn more about Christmas as a festival but also spend time with their families who come to support them.”

Behl exclaims that due to this year’s “record breaking attendance of 32,000 plus families and children” the carnival is set to go pan India in 2016 with the next edition of the festival scheduled for February 6-7, 2016 in Bengaluru.