Forest officials placed a cage with two dogs as bait behind Vibgyor High school at Thubarahalli in eastern Bengaluru on Wednesday to capture the leopard that was sighted in Whitefield, Varthur and Gunjurpalya localities on Tuesday night. 

ADVERTISEMENTS Krupanidhi, assistant conservator of forests (Bengaluru South), told reporters, “We zeroed in on this location after one person confirmed to have seen the leopard here.” On Sunday, another leopard had strayed into Vibgyor High and injured several people. 

Forest and police officials struggled to keep the residents at bay while placing the cage. A mild caning failed to deter them. The forest department also struggled to get dogs to keep as bait. It had a tough time convincing the people to get dogs as bait and stay away from the spot. It is the same spot where the cage was kept on Sunday to capture the leopard but in vain. The department brought a cage from Kaggalipura around 5.30 pm on Wednesday after it was used in the rescue of another leopard in Magadi taluk of Ramanagar district. The department is taking the help of veterinarians from the Bannerghatta Biological Park. 

Four teams of forest officials and local police perambulated the eucalyptus plantations, Gunjurpalya forest patch and Varthur green patches for signs of the leopard on Tuesday night and Wednesday morning. Some old and new pug marks were seen. But it could not be confirmed whether they were of the leopard. 

Forest and police officials said things went smoothly on Wednesday as Vibgyor High school had declared a holiday. After a meeting between forest and police officials, local residents were asked not to make noise at night, venture out at night or crowd the cage area. 

Residents are living in fear. “We fear the leopard will come and attack us,” said Pasha, a construction labourer who had first seen the leopard in the area on Tuesday night. Dipika Bajpai, deputy conservator of forests, Bengaluru Urban, cautioned people against spreading rumours. 

The Forest Department has launched a Twitter handle “@dcfbangalore” to interact faster with the people living in the troubled area, reports DHNS. 

People can post information related to forest, wildlife and conservation. Also, the police have pressed in dog squads to trace the leopard. 

“#leopardattack: We have set up a cage to capture any leopard frequenting the area near Vibgyor School” ----First tweet

I saw the leopard hiding behind the bushes on Tuesday night. Shareef, contract labourer

I saw the leopard run from the bushes and then disappear into the eucalyptus plantations on Tuesday night. Anwar Mondal, contract labourer

I could not sleep the whole night as I was worried about the safety of my two children. We lit a fire, burst crackers and stayed in groups on police instruction. Chandana Habib, 22, construction worker

There was no news of any leopard straying here in the last five years. It’s the first time that I heard of it but have not seen any so far.Gulabi Mono, resident of a slum behind Vibgyor school.