Children of many ministers and ruling party legislators have set an eye on the posts of president and vice-president of the state Youth Congress, polls for which are likely to be held in February.

ADVERTISEMENTBengaluru Development Minister K J George’s son Rana, Transport Minister Ramalinga Reddy’s daughter Soumya Reddy, Law Minister T B Jayachandra’s son Santosh, Mantar Gowda, son of Animal Husbandry Minister A Manju, and R Rajendra, senior legislator and Apex bank president K N Rajanna’s son, are prominent among those planning to contest the polls, sources said.

But Basanagouda Badarli, nephew of Sindhanur MLA Hampanagouda Badarli, Amruth Gowda, currently state Youth Congress general secretary, and Rajendra are said to be strong contenders for the post of president. 

Currently, party MLC Rizwan Arshad is holding the post of state Youth Congress president. It is Rizwan’s second term. The term of the Youth Congress president is three years. The party recently concluded the membership drive for the Youth Congress.

Rana is a wildlife activist and businessman. He is the director of Kelachandra group of companies which has coffee estates in Kodagu and Chikkamagalur and rubber industry in Kerala. Rana had run into controversy when the state government nominated him as a member of the state board for wildlife two years ago despite opposition. 

Soumya, an engineering graduate and postgraduate in environmental science, is an animal rights and environment activist. She was in the news last year for organising an eco-friendly wedding for herself at Palace Grounds in Bengaluru. She is planning to contest for the post of vice-president, which is likely to be reserved for women, sources said. Ramalinga Reddy said his daughter was keen on politics. “She is the secretary of the women’s wing of the Congress. She wants to fight elections. But, I am not keen to bring her to politics.”

Mantar had served as Hassan district Youth Congress president, while Badarli is currently heading the Koppal district Youth Congress, sources said. 

When contacted, Rizwan said the party had enrolled more than 20 lakh new members during a drive between October 22 and December 11. “The party will announce the calendar of events for the polls after the voters’ list is finalised,” he added.