In a first-of-its-kind initiative, a group of 12 wildlife volunteers have helped the Forest department in keeping the Bandipur Tiger Reserve spic and span and managing traffic.

ADVERTISEMENTBriefing reporters on the sidelines of the Serai Shutterbug Exhibition aimed at conserving wildlife, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) Vinay Luthra said on Wednesday that volunteers stayed in anti-poaching camps and other places during the recent series of holidays and helped clear garbage, manage traffic and educate people. 

The group collected Rs one lakh as penalty from people for violations, which will be used for conservation. The same will now be done during Deepavali festival and the long weekend, Luthra added. 

The Karnataka Tourism Board has been training people interested in wildlife conservation for the last one year. 

So far 250 people have been trained. The department aims to train 1,000 volunteers. 

The area of training decides the cost, to be  borne by volunteers helping in various projects like census and awareness drives. Likewise, the department plans to start eco-trails from November 1 in various forest areas. 

Besides educating people about wildlife conservation, it is aimed at encouraging photographers capture not only large carnivores and elephants, but lesser known wildlife species like frogs.  According to wildlife photographer Sudhir Shivaram, eco-trails help educate budding photographers about wildlife. 

Tourism Director G Satyavathi said that in order to attract more tourists to Karnataka and bring them closer to its culture and folklore, the department, from October 18,  plans to start cultural weekends in Mysore.  

“The detailed project report and financial details are being worked out. Tourists visit destinations and after that demand more entertainment. 

So, we are starting cultural weekends. It will be free of cost and showcase the State’s culture through dance, music and folk performances. The next destination is Hampi,” he said.