Many travellers on Tumkur Road had a pleasant surprise as they had a wonderful sight of five juvenile tuskers basking in the sun, playing in Hanumanthapura Lake at Dobbspet and amongst themselves all through Thursday.

ADVERTISEMENTFor many passersby, while this was the first time they saw wild elephants around 50 km from Bangalore City, for dwellers of Tumkur, Nelamangala, Shivagange and surrounding areas, this is a common sight.

The Forest department officials said that this is the eighth time in the last four months that a herd of elephants, mostly juvenile tuskers, has been sighted near urban spaces. The elephants have shown little interest to go back to the Adrangi forest.

The Adrangi and Nelamangala forest belt is a flat land spread across 300 sq km. The patch has a lot of plantations and houses around 15 leopards. The Hemavati lake in Tumkur is swelling and all the other lakes too are full.

Farmers are growing the favourite crops of elephants. So, the jumbos are venturing out of their travel path from Bannerghatta to Savandurga to Nelamangala, Tumkur and back.
According to K B Manjunath, deputy conservator of forests, Bangalore Rural division, “This is a herd of nine elephants. 

While driving them into the forests in the earlier operations, one tusker has moved towards Gubbi. Three are in the forest, but their location is unknown. A search for them is on by one team.  The remaining five have been camping in the lake since Wednesday night. This herd comprises of juvenile males.”   

The Forest department officials were struggling to keep people from venturing too close to the elephants. They point out that the operations to drive jumbos back into the forest get hampered due to human presence, as this confuses and panics them.

Vinay Luthra, principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife), told Deccan Herald, “Elephants are not coming into human habitation, rather people are moving into their hereditary migratory lands by converting swallows, gomala land and areas abutting forests for agricultural and other purposes. This is creating problems. 

All we can do is keep people at bay and drive the elephants back into the forest each time they venture out.”