Additional principal chief conservator of forests Jayaram said that a wildlife corridor will be laid from Bannerghatta National Park, Bengaluru, to Bhimagada Wildlife Zone.

Addressing reporters here recently, he said the corridor will also be laid at Bandipur, Nagarhole, Kudremukh National Park, Pushpagiri, Brahmagiri, Mookambika, Sharavathi, Dandeli, Kaveri and Bhadra Wildlife Parks towards the protection of wild animals and the land has been identified for the same.

“ There are private lands identified for the corridor. The owners of such lands may voluntarily declare the land as forest land and may allow for the visit of the public in the corridor. There is permission for earning revenue this way.”

There are plans of laying wildlife corridor for Chakrapura of Maharastra, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha and Himachal Pradesh, that pass through Western Ghats. There are proposals for wildlife zones in Tumkur and Kolar.

In Hassan, farmers have voluntarily come forward to sell around 3,000 acres of land to the Forest department. However, the funds fall short for the purchase of the land. Therefore, the Central Government has been requested to released Rs 400 crore towards the same.

Wildlife weeks

APCCF Jayaram felt a need to observe wildlife weeks in villages to create more awareness on wildlife.

Speaking during a preparatory meeting of the wildlife week at the Forest department office in Chikkamagaluru on Wednesday, he expressed his concern over the alarming rate of human-wildlife conflicts in the state. Elephants from Brahmagiri wildlife zone have been moving to Hassan, where a lot of human-elephant conflicts are taking place due to a restricted forest area.

He said that Karnataka holds the first place in the reproduction of elephants, lion-tailed macaque and leopards. The forest area in Bhadra Tiger Reserve is dense, providing a favouring atmosphere for tigers. The zone has 37 tigers.

It was decided in the meeting to organise the inaugural programme of wildlife week on October 3, cycle jatha for students on October 4, wildlife quiz on October 6 and valedictory programme on October 10.

Chief conservator of forests Vijay Mohan Raj, Bhadra Tiger Reserve director H C Kantaraju and DCF Chandranna were present.

 DH News ServiceADVERTISEMENT