The Uttar Pradesh government today announced an aid of Rs 30 lakh, two government jobs and an "impartial" probe into the killing of Shahjahanpur journalist in which a minister is an accused, after which the deceased's family decided to end their hunger strike from tomorrow.

ADVERTISEMENTNearly two weeks after the journalist Jagendra Singh was burnt alive in a shocking incident, Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav met his family members who put their demands.

"We had three demands-- financial assistance, government jobs and justice in the case. The CM has accepted all the three demands. We are happy that CM paid heed," Jagendra's father Sumer Singh told reporters after the meeting.

An official spokesman said Yadav announced Rs 30 lakh compensation to the deceased's family, government jobs to his two sons and also assured of speedy justice in the murder.

Yadav also assured that "impartial and unbiased" probe will be done in the case in which a minister Ram Murti Verma is an accused along with some policemen.

"The probe has been handed over to DIG, Bareilly and those guilty would be punished. The family will also be provided adequate security," the CM said in the meeting.

During the meeting, the family members of the slain journalist told chief minister about their land, which they said was allegedly grabbed. Yadav directed the District Magistrate, Shahjahanpur to look into the matter.

The deceased journalist's son Rahul said they were assured that the accused would be arrested and probe conducted without any bias.

"A financial compensation of Rs 30 lakh has been given to us, we two brothers have been given government jobs and pension for our mother," he said, adding "our hunger strike will end tomorrow."

The family members have been on the hunger strike in Shahjahanpur ever since the killing about two weeks back.

Singh, a freelance journalist, was allegedly set on fire on June 1 during a police raid at his house at Awas Vikas colony in Sadar Bazar area of Shahjananupr. He died during treatment at a hospital in Lucknow on June 8.

An FIR was registered against Verma and five others including policemen at Puwayan police station of Shahjahanpur under IPC 302 (murder), 120 B (criminal conspiracy), 504 (intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of the peace) and 506 (criminal intimidation).

The journalist had invited Verma's ire by posting reports on Facebook about illegal mining activities and land grabbing against the minister.