Vir Das started his career as a standup comedian and by creating interesting content on YouTube. He is popular for his live acts across the world and that has won him
numerous fans. 

Soon he made his debut on the silver screen with movies like ‘Delhi Belly’, ‘Badmaash Company’, ‘Go Goa Gone’, ‘Mastizaade’ and ‘Shivaay’. He has also worked on several television shows. 

He recently made his debut on Netflix with a show called ‘Abroad Understanding’. 


Book
Born Standing Up’ by Steve Martin
“I enjoy reading autobiographies and non-fiction books. The autobiography by Steve Martin is one of my favourites. His approach to comedy and how he explains comedy is exceptional. I also like reading George Carlin’s books. As I am busy with the world tour, it’s been a while since I have had a chance to read. Most of my reading material is now newspapers and scripts.”

Actor
Meryl Streep
Meryl Streep is the greatest actor there is and will ever be. She performs with such grace and passion; she gives more than her 100 percent for any role she plays. It’s hard to pick a favourite movie of hers but one of the recent ones I liked a lot was ‘August: Osage County’. In Bollywood, I also love Aamir Khan. His movies have great content and he doesn’t care about what other people think about him. He does movies the way he wants to and the audience always looks forward to something unique from him.”

Travel
Cape Town
I grew up in Cape Town so it’s very special to me. I know the different hang out places there, but each time I go back it’s a whole new experience. The city also has wonderful people, wildlife, food and everything else one needs to enjoy a great holiday. Another favourite place is Bali. I usually go there to surf, swim in the sea and hang out by the poolside.”

Musician
Miles Davis
“I am a big jazz music fan, so it goes without saying that I love Miles Davis. He has created some of the greatest music. I also love listening to ‘Guns N' Roses’ and ‘The Beatles’. In India, I have been listening to ‘Nucleya’ and I’m definitely liking his style. Since I am always travelling, I enjoy listening to music in the car, the aeroplane and while 
waiting at the airport.”

Inspiration
Audience
“I am very grateful for my audience as they have been very supportive and have encouraged me to try new things every time I am on stage. I love meeting them, interacting with them and sharing stories. They bring me joy no matter where I am and that’s why they are my inspiration to work hard.”


Food
Eggs and sausages
“I am a breakfast kind of person, so I look forward to having some eggs and sausages when I wake up. The homemade ones are always the best. When I’m travelling, I enjoy a good, hot plate of waffles with chocolate sauce. I do have a weak spot for ‘double mutton and single egg katti rolls’ available in Delhi. I make sure I get that at least once a month.”
 
ADVERTISEMENT