For an advertising professional, it is the sight of wildlife that makes him elated; for an IT professional, it is the traditions of a place that entice and for an expat, it is the myriad hues of the festival of Holi that are exciting her. When these individuals from different walks of life compile their memories, it is the photographs taken by them that reflect their experiences. 

ADVERTISEMENTIn the annual exhibition titled ‘Reflections’, these individuals take their passion for photography to new heights. “In the digital age, it is easier to take photographs. But when they enrol themselves in our photography course, they learn how to enhance the quality of images that they capture and their interest in photography increases,” explains Deepak Virmani from Delhi School of Photography.  

A nuance of this are Deepak Menon’s images that he captured at various wildlife parks. “I used to travel to National Parks and click animals as a passion. It was only a year back when I started learning photography that my interest in wildlife photography materialised,” says Menon, an advertising professional who has now bought a Nokia 5200 DSLR and is giving right shape to his creativity.

“When I first saw a full grown male tiger, about 10 feet huge, coming out of a bamboo grove on my trip to Ranthambore last March, it took me 10 seconds to realise it is actually there,” he says as one senses the shiver in his voice.   

Though wildlife and nature are Menon’s favourites, Munna Payeng likes travel photography. The IT professional wrapped a stole around a stone sculpture near Pangong Lake in Ladakh and shot the same to mystify the viewer. “Me and my friend on our trip to Ladakh found that the people worship similar structures than idols in temples. We then recreated one to represent the traditional beliefs of locals,” says Payeng.

Being a professor of Bio-chemistry doesn’t deter Sonali Basu’s passion for capturing the natural beauty of lakes in hilly areas, while delivering her services as an air hostess, Manpreet Wadhwa keeps a keen eye for the perfect frame.

Virmani elaborates, “In evenings, these professionals are relatively free and photography as a hobby needs just a camera that can be carried along anywhere.” 
The most significant narrative among these 20-25 photography enthusiasts is of Alexandra Kreins, who after shifting base to India, “waited for one whole year to shoot the festival of Holi”. She says, “I moved to India with my husband in March last year and missed Holi. So this time I went with groups of photographers to witness and shoot Holi as it is celebrated in Barsana and Nandgaon.” 

A sense of fulfillment seeps in her voice as Kreins looks at the photographs taken by her through her Sony camera. “I realised that India has a lot of opportunity for pictures and thus decided to use my camera at not just the auto but even manual and other modes!”

‘Reflections’ will be on display from June 11 to 14 at Convention Centre Foyer, India Habitat Centre.