Human-elephant conflict in many areas mainly arises due to infrastructure development in protected areas and reserves, loss of corridors and conflicting cropping pattern on the edge of the forests. 

Apart from the southern states of Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu, some human-dominated landscapes of Uttarakhand, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Odisha and West Bengal have been affected by human-elephant conflicts. While the public in southern states is generally aggressive towards animals, tribals in Jharkhand and Surguja region of Chhattisgarh are compassionate, and do not harm the animal during anti-depredation operations. By and large, they clear the passage, and elephants move away silently.

Elephant herds straying into human-dominated landscape move during nights and damage crops and other properties, while they hide themselves in tree groves during daytime. Elephant herds also stray into coffee estates, where estate owners open fire at them while chasing, as opposed to the standard practice of the Forest Department (using crackers to chase them). 

In some cases, this results in bullet injuries, leading to septicemia, followed by maggot formation and ultimately, the death of the elephant. In some cases, land owners on the fringes of the elephant reserves protect their crop by running a wire on the periphery of the field and connecting the wire illegally with the nearest power line. There are chances of elephants straying into such landscapes getting electrocuted.

In Purulia, Bankura and Midnapore districts of southern West Bengal, tribals target the elephant herd with the bow and arrow. Once again, the injury leads to septicemia, followed by maggot formation and death of the elephant. Identifying the culprits in these cases is difficult, as is their conviction.

Management action 

Such kind of retaliation by the villagers also has partly to do with the Forest Department’s apathy towards the suffering of people (death and crop loss). Attempts are now being made by Forest Departments across the states to construct and maintain barriers to prevent straying of wild elephants outside forests. 

Elephant- proof trenches and solar-powered fences constructed on the periphery of forests have been rendered ineffective for a variety of reasons. Each village has people with conflicting interests. While one group would fill up trenches to provide passage for themselves, for collection of fuelwood or for their animals to graze, other group would advocate maintenance of barriers for their crops. Now, the Forest Department is adopting more expensive barriers such as concrete structures, rails etc. In Uttarakhand, elephant-proof walls are being built on the periphery of forests.

Tribals for conservation

During my tour to Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh to evaluate the management effectiveness of some sanctuaries, I was pleasantly surprised to have a different experience altogether. Tribals in Surguja region of Chhattisgarh never target the elephants with bow and arrow or gun shots. They use crackers and make noises to chase the elephant. Some of the herds are found establishing their home ranges in Tamor Pingla sanctuary of Surajpur district. It has been concluded by experts that a herd of 15 elephants have established Tamor Pingla sanctuary as their home range. In Khunti district of Jharkhand, the place at a distance of nearly 35 km from Ranchi and birth place of River Subarnarekha, there is a cluster of villages surrounded by forests having relatively higher elephant density. These villages are Lohagirvi, Derang, Churdag, Jeetpur, Telo, Mahuatoli situated in Torpa block of Khunti district of Jharkhand state. 

The Oraon, Korva and Munda tribe are the inhabitants of these villages. They have a great sense of responsibility towards environment and do not like to harm forests and wildlife in any way. The tribe argues that the elephants have a right over the crop, as cultivation is done in areas originally belonging to wildlife. They do not claim any compensation for the damages done by elephants to their crops and any other properties. They also do not show any action in retaliation of any human death caused by elephants. If elephants do not raid their paddy crop in a particular year, they do not commence harvest. On the contrary, they request the range forest officer to drive herds to their paddy fields. This practice is based on the belief that elephants should get their fair share and only then the crop can be harvested.

(The author is a retired principal chief conservator of forests, Karnataka)