Indian Mammals - A Field Guide’, was launched recently by Vivek C Menon, executive director and CEO of Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), at Taj Vivanta, MG Road. Cricketer and wildlife lover Anil Kumble, the chief guest for the evening, launched the book to support the cause of conservation, in the presence of distinguished dignitaries.

ADVERTISEMENTThe book covers a rich diversity of more than 400 mammal species with about 4,000 striking photographs, distribution maps and is an extensively researched and well-brought out scientific guide that is reviewed by experts. 

Speaking at the launch, Kumble congratulated Vivek for the effort and said, “It is an illustrative, exhaustive and ideal companion for a scientist, tourist and wildlife photographer.”

Anil was the member of the Wildlife Board and said that the objective is to see to it that the species will remain so for a long time. He also cited India’s win at the recent match in Lords and said that both ‘cricket and wildlife conservation are statistically driven’.

 He acknowledged the contributions of the photographers and said that wildlife conservation is about sustaining what exists.

“The participation of all citizens is required for the preservation of all species. We should build a solution involving protection, growth, welfare and support systems. We have to create a model on how conservation has to be done and how to put together a real solution.” 

 Vivek Menon said that the surge in wildlife photography has brought in a lot of awareness among conservation of species and he threw light on the materialisation of the book.

 “The main reason as to why I decided to bring out a book on mammals is because we are mammals and hence need to address our own group.” He added that he produced a field guide because many animal specialists know about species that only fall under the ambit of their field. 

The launch was followed by a panel discussion on ‘India’s Conservation Story: Charismatic vs Non-charismatic mammals’ and the dignitaries in the panel were Dinesh Kumble, wildlife photographer; Vinay Luthra, the chief wildlife warden of Karnataka; Anita Nair, writer; Brinda Malhotra, the CSR Head of Aircel; Vivek Menon and Sukumar, the Trustee of WTI, who also was the moderator. 
 
The main topic of the discussion was whether conservation measures are taking place towards the non-charismatic and lesser known mammals as much as it is towards the charismatic mammals, such as the lion-tailed macaque, tigers and elephants.

 Sukumar opened the discussion by saying that a lot of non-charismatic animals are getting attention today and Dinesh Kumble added that for conservation of non-charismatic animals, sanctuaries and reserves have to be renamed with one non-charismatic animal so that there is more awareness. 

The members among the audience included historian and social scientist, Ramachandra Guha and Gopalkrishna Gandhi.