Mitigating conflict

Some enlightened villagers have participated voluntarily to make elephant corridors safe for wild elephants to migrate from one forest to another. ADVERTISEMENTThanks to their efforts, it is now possible for the government to declare Kaniyanapura and nearby areas in the Chamarajanagar region a reserve forest. That would help in maintaining the elephant corridor linking Bandipur Tiger Reserve and Madumalai Wildlife Sanctuary in Tamilnadu. 

This shows that villagers have a stake in seeing that wildlife is safe which means the villagers too could breathe easily, free of rampaging elephants. Demarcating safe corridors for wild elephants and maintaining these with the cooperation of the villagers and forest staff would be a step in the right direction. Such a step would protect the elephants as well as serve the interests of the villagers. 

Those enclaves that remain within a wildlife sanctuary have the onus of protecting wildlife. It would be a good idea if the villages were protected by fences and elephant trenches that would prevent animal attacks during night. The more the tribals and villagers in and around a wildlife sanctuary are made the stakeholders, the better would be the conservation efforts.  

Night driving, in general, through a wildlife sanctuary is banned as both predators and prey could be using the highways for crossing and a speeding vehicle could knock down any animal. That is the reason why it is important to impose speed limit, such as maximum of 40 kmph through highways that pass through wildlife sanctuaries. Moreover, road humps and rumbler-strips should be erected to ensure that speed is limited. 

Speed sensing devices like radars and cameras should be installed at strategic points, in secret spots so that speeding vehicle drivers are hauled up and fined heavily. Littering, loud honking, getting off the vehicles, picnicking, smoking and setting fires inside the sanctuaries should be banned. 

Warning boards should be put up about speed limits and the fact that wildlife has priority when it comes to crossing a highway should be made clear. Security guards should be posted at a few places to keep an eye on the visitors while they use the highway. 

Smuggling of animal products like skins, teeth, bones and other parts, or rare medicinal plants should be checked at regularly at check-posts at the entry as well as exit point.
There are problems when wildlife encroaches on human habitation and destroys life, property and standing crops. This issue has no easy solution but needs innovative measures to minimise man-animal conflict. 

Elephants trenches, mildly electrical fences that stun but not kill animals, watch towers, vigilant guards and fences around cultivated lands and villages would go a long way towards protecting villagers, livestock, poultry and crops from destruction by wildlife. Forest guards should be posted in vulnerable areas who could spot wild animals that could possibly stray away from their path and enter habited villages and standing crops. Those rogue elephants and man-eating tigers should be identified which can be tranquillised and rehabilitated elsewhere.