Road humps have brought down wild animal casualties on National Highways 67 (Gundlupet-Ooty) and 212 in Bandipur, bringing cheer to environmentalists.

ADVERTISEMENTThe National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) has laid 32 road humps along the stretch connecting Melkamanahalli (entry point to Bandipur) and Mudumalai. But work on the road humps is still in progress on NH 212. 

Sources said the number of road kills on the highway cutting through the Bandipur National Park has reduced greatly. 

“First, the night traffic ban reduced the number of animal deaths. The road humps have contributed to further improvement in the safety of animals. There is a decline in animal deaths by at least 75 per cent,” said a wildlife enthusiast here.

Though the demand for road humps along the stretch is at least a decade old, it got shriller in October 2011, when a speeding truck ran over an elephant calf, which was returning after drinking water from River Molehole along with its mother. Work on the road humps began in March 2012, but gathered pace after chief conservator of forests Kumar Pushkar assumed office.

“We have already completed work on the stretch connecting Ooty. The work on NH 212 has been stopped for a few days due to rain. It will resume shortly and will be completed at the earliest,” said Pushkar.

“Earlier, at least one wild animal would be killed every week. The number has reduced to a great extent,” said another wildlife enthusiast. Five animals, including two monitor lizards, a chital and a sambar died since January 2012 on NH 212 (the last two died 10 days ago).

“The sambar and chital died at Alegowdanakatte in Maddur range. Drivers responsible for the accidents have been detained and their vehicles have been seized,” Pushkar said.

But these humps have not stopped the deaths of animals completely on NH 67, where a mount jack, a wild boar, a mouse deer, a chital and a macaque were killed by speeding vehicles between January 2012 and March 2012.

”The chital was run over by a speeding truck. All these deaths happened around 8 pm, when the drivers race against highway closure deadlines,” said a source in the department.

However, the department is confident that the number of deaths will reduce further through awareness programmes.