Earth Hour was observed on Saturday with more people coming forward to express concern over climate change by switching off lights between 8.30 pm and 9.30 pm.

ADVERTISEMENT Besides, rallies, street plays and campaigns were held to mark the occasion.
 ‘Switch off something to save energy’ was the message of Air Commodore S S Deshpande, DDG, NCC Directorate, Karnataka and Goa, to NCC cadets while flagging off a rally on the occasion of Earth Hour Day. 

He exhorted the cadets to contribute for reduction in energy consumption, and emphasised that every time one entered a building or a room he or she should endeavour to switch off at least one non-essential electrical appliance.

NCC cadets took part in poster and slogan competitions, lectures, street plays, and rallies. As many as 500 cadets, officers and staff participated in a Save Energy Rally from Cubbon Park to Field Marshal Manekshaw Parade Grounds.  Prior to the rally, a street play propagating the need to reduce energy consumption was performed by the cadets.   
The State government departments, including Karnataka Renewable Energy Development Limited, Bescom, Department of Ecology and Forestry, switched off the lights at the designated time. Employees of Brigade Enterprises Pvt Ltd., Oracle, Infosys, HP, Dell Quest and other corporates also participated. 

About 10 schools and colleges, including Mount Carmel College and St Joseph College, organised the campaigns.  People gathered at Brigade Road and Forum Mall at Koramangala. Indian Institute of Science (IISc) Bangalore also switched off lights at its main building on the campus. 

Hotels such as ITC Windsor reduced electrical consumption, particularly non-essential, during the stated time. Posters in the public areas and messages on public area function boards were displayed, encouraging guests to leave their rooms and turn off lights during the Earth Hour. 

The practice began in 2007, when the World Wildlife Fund of Australia encouraged people to turn off the lights for an hour to take a stand against climate change. 

In 2011, about 135 countries took part to increase awareness about the effects of climate change.