When we talk about animal conservation, we generally picture cute pandas and cuddly elephants. But did you know that the ferocious ones like crocodiles and snakes need our attention too? Animal Planet’s new show, Biggest and Baddest, does just that. The show’s handsome host Niall McCann, travels through some tough terrains, looking for the biggest and the baddest creatures of the planet. 

ADVERTISEMENTNiall reveals the idea behind the ambitious show. “We basically look at human-animal conflicts. We try to put out the negative interactions, which take place on every level. Certain species have a reputation for being large and dangerous. Our persecution complex towards such animals adds fuel to the fire. Through human stories, we try to capture the nuances of such species. And a big chunk of our efforts also goes into their conservation,” he explains.

Every episode of the show focuses on one dangerous animal and showcases the journey of Niall and his crew into dense forests, and their struggling efforts to capture the creatures on film. But, are such animals comfortable with humans entering their territories? Niall says, “As we are the ones entering territories of these animals, they have every right to defend themselves. So, our logic is to go in with reasoned confidence, good sense of judgement and speed. We need to have loads of respect for animals and their spaces.”

Recalling a few incidents from the show, he says, “I remember one episode, where we were charged by a herd of angry elephants. In another episode, a lion under the effect of anaesthesia woke up sooner than we thought. Theoretically, it seems hilarious. But in reality, it was really scary.”

Belonging to a family of biologists, Niall didn’t have to think twice to find his calling. He was just six years old when he found a dead fish on the beach. It was then that he decided to get into this field. “I started going on expeditions when I was 17. I organised my own expedition when I was 21,” he says. In a short span of time, he climbed the Yosemite Hills, crossed the Atlantic Ocean, and is even pursuing his PhD. Talk about being the jack of all trades, and being the master of them too!

Niall fondly recalls one episode involving mountain gorillas in Uganda. “These gorillas have incredible power and strength and have an extreme penchant for violence. But they hold everything in and paint a serene picture. To look for these critically-endangered species, we trekked for hours, lugging our camera gear, before finally spotting them. I, for one, thoroughly enjoyed shooting that episode.”

But if these animals, who are capable of protecting themselves are deemed endangered, then the threats they face must be really serious. “Most of the species that we select for our episodes are the invasive ones, which means that they are in the news for their not-so-happy interactions with humans. In season 2, I go on a journey to search for Burmese pythons in Florida. The conflict in this area was really complex. Humans hunt crocodiles and snakes. But, nobody looks at the need for the conservation of such despised creatures,” says Niall.

So, what does a guy who has travelled the world extensively, and been on exciting adventures, aspire for in the future? “I want to encourage people to take an interest in wildlife. In fact, I hope increasing number of people take up biology as a profession. Our cultures are intertwined with wildlife. I wish people would start respecting that,” says Niall.

Going by the theme of the show, which is the biggest and baddest creature he has come across? “It certainly has to be the Nile crocodile. Its sheer size will make your eyes pop out,” concludes Niall.

Catch Biggest and Baddest, Monday to Friday, at 9 pm on Animal Planet.