Rajesh Ramakrishnan and Aravind Venkataram were both working in the IT sector but they decided to give up their cushy jobs about a year ago and chase their passion for wildlife photography. The duo met during one of their wildlife trips and soon decided to piece together their ideas to start their own venture — ‘Wolfpack’. 

ADVERTISEMENTThey always wanted to do something on their own but their jobs kept them so busy that they never really got the chance to venture out on their own. Rajesh is a chartered accountant, with close to 16 years of experience in the business operations consulting space. He would take frequent breaks and venture out into the wild. 

    “It is to share our inspiration with the larger community that we actively founded ‘Wolfpack’,” he explains. Aravind spent 15 years in the outdoor advertising business, but it was when his job took him across the country that he found an interest in wildlife. 

     “It wasn’t an easy choice at all but we were bored and tired of what we were doing and decided to start something that we’ve been thinking about for a long time,” explains Aravind. 

Their travel has taken them to Bandipur National Tiger Reserve and Tadoba National Park. “The place was so beautiful and we had so many things around us to capture. This is when the idea of using our own pictures on the T-shirts that we make at ‘Wolfpack’ struck us,” explains Rajesh.    

Aravind and Rajesh worked on various themes and categories such as wildlife, preserving birds, messages of conservation and

benefits of running and cycling. “All the T-shirts have a definite message with a catchy tagline. For instance, we shot a picture of a buck and in an effort to protect them we thought we should emboss a message like ‘Don’t Pass the Buck’ on the tee, we had another that read — 

cycling, recycling and  upcycling and yet another tee with a cycling picture inspiring people to start cycling,” explain Rajesh and Aravind. 

They say that it is their mission to encourage people and communities towards a greener world through a better understanding of the environment.   

  “We are passionate about travelling and photography. We have not only got our families and a close circuit of friends involved in our mission, we have extended it to all those who have similar interests,” adds Aravind.    They observe that people are so caught up between work and home that they barely have time to venture outdoors. “We bridge this gap and offer the perfect way to get outdoors and promote this message on our T-Shirts. We hope our efforts to get people to come out of their comfort zone will work well,” they say.  

   In addition to working on T-shirts, they also regularly host screenings of wildlife movies and photography workshops.  For details, log onto thewolfpackstore.com