Bengaluru wears many hats – IT Hub, Startup Capital, Science City and the like. But in the past few years, the city has quietly emerged as a centre for illegal wildlife trade.

ADVERTISEMENTForest department officials and sleuths from the Criminal Investigation Department’s Forest Cell say Bengaluru is the prime spot for wildlife activity as it is well connected by road, rail and air. Besides, several wildlife traders are using the Internet to interact with wildlife traders and buyers across the world to sell their products.

In Karnataka, Mysuru stands first in illegal wildlife trade because of its proximity to prime forests – Nagarahole and  Bandipur tiger reserves.

Head of Traffic India (Wildlife) Shekhar Kumar Niraj said there was an increase in online wildlife trade. 

“They can fake their identity to interact with customers and the account is not used after one transaction. So, it becomes a challenge to track them down,” he says. 

He pointed out that though tiger products and ivory were in demand globally, especially in China and South Korea, the demand for pangolin has also seen a rise in Nepal, Bangladesh and America. The elite in Bengaluru are also rushing for illegal products to flaunt their status symbol. The demand includes Marmoset monkeys, Capuchin monkeys, Chimpanzees, Langoors, Nilgiri Langoors, exotic birds, pangolin, star tortoise, turtles, Alexandrine parakeets and spotted black terrapins.

Wildlife warden Sharat Babu says many websites also sell products like snares and traps to capture wild animals. 

“There is no regulation as to what can be sold and what cannot be. It is an open market. This has also made the city a hub of wildlife trade. In Bengaluru, on an average, at least one seizure takes place every month, while it is 12 across Karnataka. Last year, the CID Forest Cell booked 50 cases of poaching in the state and for the year 2016, up to April, 14 cases have been booked. 

Most of these cases were in Bengaluru and surrounding areas. These included ivory, tiger and leopard pelts and weapons.

Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) B J Hosmath told Deccan Herald that one cannot say that wildlife poaching cases have come down or have increased. But cases keep happening and now the department is taking the help of legal experts to improve its ability to book cases and penalise offenders. 

For the past one year, the department has been taking the help of retired Public Prosecutor Prakash Shetty who has been helping in strengthening the cases and bringing poachers to book, besides helping solve the cases.

Shetty is also training the staff in short-term courses and legal courses. Apart from this, the help of experts is also being taken to train and strengthen the field staff.
DH News Service