She once blazed the screen with her dynamism. But that is not what sets her apart. Actor Amala Akkineni has been tireless in her work for social change — animal and child welfare, wildlife protection, empowerment of rural women, HIV awareness and more. Simplicity has been her signature notwithstanding that she is the wife of Telugu superstar Nagarjuna. 

She is also back on screen in some brief and powerful roles. In a candid chat with Anupama Ramakrishnan, Amala gives a sneak peak into her home, her work and how life has changed over the years.      

A humanitarian, an actor and at the helm of many organisations. How do you balance it all? 
Nothing comes easy. It is an everyday commitment. When you are young, you fight your way through your beliefs. Isn’t life about people, about relationships and importantly, the living creatures around you? When I came into cinema, I was a hot headed, firebrand woman out to change the world. Twenty five years later, I am in a nice place. I have nothing to hide.

What keeps you motivated? 
You look at the magnificence of every creation around you and are able to relax in it. It is about to what extent you can help them. It is about that wisdom, that ability to be trusting of your relationships. 

How does it feel to have a superstar and a young actor at home?
Very exciting. Each one is working on a different project. As you know, it is not a nine-to-five job. It takes one or two years of our lives for a project. You have to be disciplined, otherwise you cannot survive. We are extremely self-driven. My family doesn’t expect me to wait on them. If there is an outdoor shoot, my husband is up early, makes his coffee and leaves for the shoot. If we are all in the city together, we catch up for 
dinner.

Talking of dinner, who cooks the best?
I am the fruits and vegetables lady. So I keep making salads, especially fruit salad, for Akhil (actor-son) though he loves ‘Hyderabadi biryani’ the most. But ask me who is the best cook in the house and I would say Nag (chuckles). 

Does the adulation by the fans get to you at least some time?
If five of us are at the airport, every smartphone is out videographing us. There is no private moment. The adulation is a double-edged sword. But we are humbled by the love of the community. Sometimes, there are four generations of people waiting to see us. You know, my father-in-law would tell us to harness the adoration in a positive way. To use the attention of fans to do good things, like help them do away with superstitions. 

You came back to Malayalam films in a big way this year. Your take on it..
The scripts there are real even as the rest of the country is still stuck in the ‘good person’ characters. Their films are closer to life and there is always a grey or black shade to the character.

Can’t help asking, your saris are legendary... Tell me where you pick them up from. 
(Laughs) Don’t we Indian women have a weakness for saris? I get them from independent weavers and the Crafts Council. In fact, the weavers ‘whatsapp’ me to come and check out their work. Some amazing work is being done by the artisans. If a sari is worth Rs 1,500, the amount would help the poor artisan family buy their ‘kirana’ supplies for 15 days. Indian handlooms are to die for. You would never want to wear 
synthetic.

But in films, you are forced to wear synthetic... 
Now, when you graduate to ‘amma’ roles, they don’t. You get cotton saris to wear, thankfully! (laughs) ADVERTISEMENT