Based on an African model, the Karnataka government has proposed to open the doors of it’s eco-sensitive areas to private wildlife reserves. While forest officials explain that this plan is to benefit the farmers, promote eco-tourism and reduce man-animal conflict, many wildlife activists and conservationists have criticised the proposal stating that this will only benefit the rich and will be an easy back-door entry for real estate owners and industrialists who own land on the fringes of protected areas. ADVERTISEMENTVijay Nishanth, tree doctor, says, “Two years back the officials themselves were against it, how come this sudden change? In the meeting that was held last Monday, 90 per cent of people said no to the idea. Forest officials can’t even manage the regular activities; we don’t understand why they are getting into all this. They are claiming that only five per cent area will be used for the construction of resorts, hotels and home-stays while the rest 95 per cent will be used for conservation of flora and fauna.”This plan, he says, will surely cause distress to the existing wildlife. Vijay points out that, it is already mentioned in the draft that the government will not take any responsibility in case of an untoward incident. “Not just humans, but animals lives are also at stake in the same way. We should not entertain such projects,” he adds.     Veeresh G, wildlife conservationist, feels that the proposed project is not suitable for the Western Ghat landscape since the landscape here is unlike in Africa, which has mainly plain and dry lands.“We have so many encroachments happening in the Western Ghats. In Chikkamagaluru itself, there are 40, 000 encroachment cases, in which 16,000 forest encroachment cases are still pending and these lands are still not given back to the forest,” he highlights. Fifteen years ago, the government started jungle resorts in small-scale six tent-based rooms in the name of eco-tourism for education purpose in Bhadra Tiger Reserve. “They took permission for 12 buildings, which is now 32 buildings up. Looks like they are trying the same strategy yet again,” he says.  Nineteen national parks and sanctuaries are declared as eco-sensitive zones by the Supreme Court. This proposal also questions the wildlife conservation act.“There is a clear guideline in the National Parks Conservation Association (NPCA) that the buffer area in and around sanctuaries, national parks or tiger reserves cannot be used for tourism purpose. It is a clear violation of the Wildlife Act,” says Veeresh.  Challenges of the project*More man-animal conflictConstruction work in eco-sensitive zones can disturb wildlife. There will be more human and vehicular movements.  *Salt licks and bait animalsTo attract wild animals, resort owners might set up salt licks. Sometimes, they also bait wild animals in private reserves. If such activities increases, who will control them? This is where management issues will arise, says Veeresh.*Resort owners will set up private lakes which will block the natural streams, leading to shortage of water for wild animals. Things that need focus There are many proposals still pending at the government level. If they actually want to help conserve wildlife, they need to clear them. Community conservation reserve, minor forest to be added to reserve forest and reserve forest to be added to the sanctuary and national parks. “If these areas are notified and considered as forests, there will be lakhs of acres that will be converted into forests. Otherwise, this proposal will only benefit politicians, businessmen and industrialists.”