While Syed Kirmani is best known for his cricketing abilities, there are only a few who know about his avid interest in golf. In conversation with Metrolife, Syed confides that as a cricketer, he always thought that golf was an ‘easy game’. “Even after having played cricket for so many years, I was surprised and dismayed at how difficult golf is. Every time I tried to follow Tiger Woods, my shots were getting into the woods,” he laughs. 

ADVERTISEMENTHe follows all sports closely and Syed admits that he has taken a liking to golf. “Although I have been following all major sports, I find that golf is the best game. The reason why I am so fond of the game is that I am a nature and wildlife freak. What better place than the golf course to get some fresh air?” he smiles, adding, “golf is a real gentleman’s game. There are a lot of technicalities involved.” His ultimate desire, he says, is to own a cottage on a golf course! “There’ll be no pollution, no traffic and complete peace of mind,” he says. 

Doing his bit to improve the state of sports in the State, Syed says his association is trying to facilitate district talent. “We want to develop cricket in Karnataka, which is the reason we are training promising cricketers in the age group of 14 to 19. We have ensured that the coaches speak the local language as well, so that it does not pose as a barrier,” he explains. 

Even so, he feels that there is a need for encouragement for the same in schools and colleges. “It’s important to go down to the grassroot level to mould any sportsperson. Plus, students should learn to balance sports and academics,” he says. 

Ask him what his success mantra is and Syed says that he has been gifted. “I have been gifted the sporting talent by the Almighty. But along with it, there is a lot of hard work, honesty and sincerity that has helped me achieve success,” he says. 

Syed, who has also ventured into films, has been spotted in the movie Kabhi Ajnabi The, where he played the role of an underworld character. He is making a cameo appearance in a Malayalam film that is yet to be released, called Mazhavillinattam Vare, which is about a cricketer’s life changing journey. But Syed says that there are no more films in the pipeline at the moment. “With regard to films, I don’t have anything coming up,” he signs off.