India ranks second after Indonesia on the global list of shark fishing nations as fishing of the species in the country has progressed from being "incidental" to "targeted", a wildlife body today said.

ADVERTISEMENT"Shark fishing in India has progressed from being incidental to targeted over the years. The transformation occurred only during the 1990s due to increasing demand in the international market which has caused serious concerns about the sustainability of these catches.

"Mechanised trawl nets, gills nets and line gear operations contribute to maximum exploitation," WWF India said on the eve of Shark Awareness Day.

WWF India said under India's Wildlife Protection Act of India 1972, of the 88 shark species found in Indian waters, four have been listed as protected under Schedule I.

It said hunting, exploitation and trade of these four species - whale shark (Rhincodon typus), Pondicherry shark (Carcharhinus hemiodon), Ganges shark (Glyphis gangeticus) and the speartooth shark (Glyphis glyphis) is banned.

It said in an effort to promote sustainable shark fisheries and better monitor how many and what species were being caught, India announced a ban on the practice of shark finning by issuing the 'Fins Naturally Attached' policy requiring fishers to land sharks with their fins attached.

"Globally, finning is a common practice of removal of shark fins for export purpose to nations, particularly China, for its use in soups and other delicacies. The remaining shark body is discarded into the sea.

"Unable to move effectively without their fins, most times these animals sink to the bottom of the ocean and die either through suffocation or attacked by other predators. In India the shark fish is fully used and follows a 'zero waste' policy," WWF India said.

It said according to its report released last year, around one in four species of sharks, rays and skates is now considered to be "threatened" globally, primarily due to overfishing.

The international trade in sharks is further regulated through CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna) to which India has been party since 1976. In 2013, four species of sharks found in Indian waters were listed in Appendix II of CITES.

"This highlights the need for strict regulation of commercial international trade in these species, requiring appropriate permits and documentation," it said.

Globally, July 14 is observed as Shark Awareness Day to promote conservation of the species, a better understanding and to address some of the threats facing sharks in oceans across the world.

Globally, out of the 450+ species of sharks, only a few have been known to attack humans and these attacks are very rare while humans kill millions of sharks each year, it said.

"Shark species worldwide are dwindling under mounting fishing pressures. They are also often accidentally caught and killed in the course of fishing operations targeting other species.

"Given their slow growth, maturity and small brood, they are intrinsically vulnerable to overfishing. The killing of sharks is on the rise for commercial purposes including local consumption of meat, fins for export (used in shark and rays fin soup) and industrial use of skin and cartilage," the body said adding that many species are being pushed to the brink of extinction.

"WWF-India aims to work towards the conservation, management and sustainability of shark fisheries in India through active multi-stakeholder participation and support.

"A scoping study has been initiated in one of the major shark trading centres in southern India, with plans to expand the scope of work to other major shark landing centres, to assess the status and extent of exploitation of different species in India's shark fishery," it said.