Britain’s Prince Charles and wife Camilla Parker Bowles, the Duchess of Cornwall, had a taste of Kerala’s heritage and history on Monday, the first day of their four-day visit to the state. 

ADVERTISEMENTThey first visited the Kerala Folklore Museum and Theatre at Thevara near Kochi.
The tourism department had organised Kathakali and Kalaripayattu performances for the royal couple.

 Kathakali artistes R L V Radhakrishnan and Kalamandalam Anil performed the Narakasura Vadham, while the Nettoor Kalaripayattu group showcased the state’s traditional martial art form.

George Thaliyath, proprietor of the museum, said Prince Charles spoke with  artistes and appreciated their performance. The museum showcases works of traditional Kerala architecture apart from musical instruments and mural art of Kerala. 

The royal couple interacted with people who had gathered around the museum. 

Later in the day, the state government hosted  dinner for the British delegation.
As part of the delegation’s visit, UK-based engineering consultancy firm Atkins is expected to begin its partnership with the municipality of Aluva, a city suburb, where guidelines will be provided to the local body in planning infrastructure.

Meanwhile, Bharat Suresh Joshi, the British deputy high commissioner in Chennai, earlier told reporters that the United Kingdom recognised Prime Minister Manmohan Singh’s decision to not attend the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting at Colombo as a difficult one.

On Tuesday, the royal couple will visit the Cochin Shipyard and the Vazhachal forest range in Thrissur where they will view the region’s famed elephant corridor. 

They will interact with local community representatives and wildlife conservation activists. 

The district administration has made elaborate security arrangements. More than 350 police personnel under six DySPs will be stationed at Vazhachal on Tuesday.

Over the next couple of days, the royal couple will take a break at Kumarakom and will later take part in Prince Charles 65th birthday celebrations. 

They will also visit the Jewish synagogue in Mattancherry near Kochi before winding up their visit on Thursday.