A way of thinking

Tune in to ‘Ghosts of Girlfriends Past’ on WB at 7 pm on July 16. This is the story of Connor (played by Matthew McConaughey), who is only interested in casual affairs and cannot understand everlasting love or relationships. 

Connor reaches his younger brother’s wedding rehearsal at their dead uncle’s estate, takes him aside and does his best to dissuade him from tying the knot. Later, Uncle Wayne’s ghost (essayed by Michael Douglas) appears before Connor and tries to undo all the lessons that Wayne has given Connor. 

Will Connor change his way of thinking? Watch the film to find out. It also stars Jennifer Garner.

Life spirals out of control

Catch Ab Tak Chappan on Filmy at 9.30 pm on July 16. This film is about Sadhu Agashe, an encounter specialist who has killed 56 people so far. He eliminates those unwanted elements of society who handle power and could escape the clutches of law. He also has the full support of his mentor, commissioner Pradhan. 

Sadhu leads a very normal middle-class life at home with his wife and young son. His friends are colleagues from his team, including the new recruit Jatin. But things begin to spin out of control when Suchak is hired as a new police commissioner and his own teammates begin to turn bitter towards him. Sadhu’s world is shattered when his wife is killed. He resigns from his job and discovers that he has become a fugitive in the eyes of his own people. Also, he learns that his life could be in danger too. In order to save his life, he joins hands with some of those criminals he had once fought against. The movie stars Nana Patekar, Mohan Agashe, Revathi, Hrishitaa Bhatt and Yashpal Sharma.

Convinced of his powers

Bolt’ tells the story a dog who plays a heroic character in a hit television show and has some trouble recognising that he doesn’t actually have superpowers. 

This becomes something of a hindrance when he is accidentally shipped from Hollywood to New York City. From there, he has to make his way home with the help of a mangy old cat and an overweight hamster in a plastic ball. 

Voices in this animated film are provided by John Travolta, Miley Cyrus, Susie Essman, Mark Walton and Malcolm McDowell. Catch ‘Bolt’ on Star Movies at 11.32 pm on July 16.

Not alone on the island

Uninhabited’ is the story of a vacation that goes terribly long. Harry and Beth, a young couple, think that short camping holiday on an isolated coral island will be the perfect get-away for them. ADVERTISEMENTThe island is beautiful, with a wife reef, palms and bright birds and wildlife. But even though they’re having a great time, the couple begin to suspect that they might not be the island’s only occupants. Some of their things go missing and one day, in a terrifying twist, they discover someone’s footprints in the sand. At first, they are amused. Then they begin to suspect that the island is inhabited by a ghost, seeking retribution for a past outrage. Catch the film on Zee Studio at 7.05 pm on July 16. It stars Geraldine Hakewill, Henry James, Tasia Zalar, Billy Milionis, Bob Baines and Terry Siourounis and is directed by Bill Bennett.

Culinary delights on a platter

Watch the third season of ‘Man Vs Food’ on TLC at 10.30 pm on July 16. 
In this new host Adam Richman sets out to travel the country in search of the best places to do some serious indulging — in terms of the taste buds. 

After exploring Knoxville, Sacramento and Jersey Shore, he checks out the best that Long Island has to offer in this episode.

(tv show timings are subject to change)