People in South Kodagu have been experiencing the menace of wild animals in the last five years. Apart from wild elephants, there are tigers, bison and bears lurking around in the region.ADVERTISEMENTPeople in the vicinity of Nagarahole National Park have been witnessing the presence of wild animals in residential areas. But, till the last decade, the picture was entirely different.The people would raise alarm to drive away elephants that snuck into paddy fields. Farmers put up scaffolding in the farms to keep an eye on wild animals. But, today, the animal population is also on the rise and there is a shortage of people to take care of agricultural produce at the farms.Nagarahole forest division falling within the limits of Kodagu and Mysuru districts is currently spread over 2,000 acres and is surrounded by agricultural farmers. There is a movement of a lot of people in these areas and the wild animals have been living in the forest area which is left.After elephants, the highest amount of conflict has been with tigers. Twenty years ago, a tribal man was killed by a tiger in a hamlet in Karmadu, situated on the periphery of the forest. Later, no such incident took place till tigers recently claimed 3 lives in a span of 15 days, in Srimangala hobli.According to wildlife expert Kunjangada Bose Madappa, tigers attacking human beings is rare. He said the tigers in Srimangala might have come to plantations in search of their prey. When they encountered human beings, they might have attacked the people.Labourers in panicFollowing the tiger menace, fear has gripped the region. Work in plantations has come to a standstill.Nowadays, the labourers are afraid to walk in the plantations even during broad daylight, owing to the fear of tigers.Kutta, Srimangala, Manchalli, Nalkere, Kanuru, Nitturu, Karmadu, Balele, Devanuru, Titimati, Dubare, Nanjarayapattana, which come under Nagarahole forest area, have been witnessing increasing wild animal menace.Wild elephants are being spotted in urban areas these days. Three days ago, an elephant that came to a crowded place in Karada in Virajpet, had smashed a car during the day.Protests intensifyFarmer organisations and other unions have been staging protests against the forest department for the last few days, urging them to control the menace of wild animals.The movements have been recorded in places closer to the protest sites. On Tuesday, a tiger killed a cow in Kottageri in Balele, 10 km away from the site where the people had staged a dharna.Srimangala RFO Veerendra said that as the coffee plantations have spread along the forest borders, it is difficult to search and capture the tiger. However, efforts are on to
prevent the loss of lives.P R Muttamma from Jungle Hadi said that the tribals have been living with wild animals for a hundred years and the animals have never harmed the people. The tribal population will continue to live with wildlife in future as well.Nagarahole National Park director Mahesh Kumar said that Nagarhole National Park has been declared as a protected zone for tigers. The tiger population has increased since then and there are about 125 tigers in Nagarahole.Balele Education Society president Alamengada Bose Mandanna said that students are afraid to go to schools and colleges owing to tiger and elephant menace. The forest department should take immediate and effective action.