Coorg Wildlife Society president Col (retd) C P Muthanna said, coffee cultivation, which is considered as the lifeline of the people of Kodagu, has not harmed the environment in any way. No restrictions should be imposed on farming practices, which are being followed for more than a century, he said.

ADVERTISEMENTSpeaking to presspersons here recently, he said, in the wake of opposition to Dr Madhav Gadgil committee recommendations, the Centre had constituted a committee headed by Kasturirangan. “Members of the society met Kasturirangan committee members recently and raised objections against a few recommendations made in the Madhav Gadgil report, he said.

“We will accept a few recommendations made by Gadgil on the need for conserving rivers, flora and fauna on the Western Ghats. However, the point that horticulture crops, especially coffee, affects bio-diversity badly is unaccepted. Coffee is being grown under huge trees in Kodagu. Along with coffee, growers also plant fruit bearing trees,” Muthanna said.

He said: “We are opposed to the recommendation on restriction on use of pesticides. Without the use of pesticides, coffee cannot be grown. There is a need to create awareness on the ill-effects of excessive use of pesticides and convince growers to go for alternative methods to save the plants. However, the recommendation that there should not be a single-crop pattern on private lands in Western Ghats region has created fear in the minds of the farmers.”

Muthanna said, the society will welcome the recommendation to declare Kodagu as an eco-sensitive zone. Conversion of agriculture land for other use should be banned. It should clearly mention that farmland and coffee plantations should not be used for non-agriculture activities. 

“We welcome the recommendations of the committee on giving forest rights to forest dwellers as per Forest Rights Act. Instead of allowing the forest dwellers to reside inside the forest, they should be allowed to reside on the periphery of the forest. If they are allowed to reside inside the forest, the authorities will not be able to provide basic facilities to forest dwellers,” he said.

Society vice-president B A Poonaccha, secretary Shyama Appanna and others were present.