The Rajasthan cabinet at its meeting held here at Chief Minister’s office approved the proposal of developing Rajiv Gandhi Biosphere Reserve. This decision will prove to be milestone in environment protection. The meeting was presided over by Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot.

ADVERTISEMENTThe State Cabinet also gave nod to the proposal regarding publication of last Notification for Mukundara Hills National Park, proposal for formation of Rajasthan Ex-Servicemen Corporation (REXCO) Limited, proposal to provide a customised package to Regen Powertech Pvt Ltd and L M Wind Power Blades (India) Pvt Ltd. It gave in principle approval for the amendment in the “Rajasthan State and Subordinate Services (Direct Recruitment by Combined Competitive Examination) Rules, 1999”.

The creation of Rajiv Gandhi Biosphere Reserve connecting various national parks and sanctuaries in the state by a corridor would pave way for the safe passage of wildlife in National Parks and Sanctuaries of Rajasthan, besides helping in efforts made for tiger conservation. The proposal would be sent to the Union Ministry of Forest and Environment for approval.

The State Cabinet also gave nod to the proposal regarding publication of last notification for Mukundara Hills National Park under the provisions of Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972. This National Park would encourage eco-tourism in Hadoti region and pave way for the development of corridor between Ranthambore Tiger Reserve and Mukundara Hills. The Cabinet approved the package of Rs 10 lakh each and other facilities permissible by the Government of India for the 37 families living in Mukundara Hills National Park boundary area.

The proposal for formation of Rajasthan Ex-Servicemen Corporation (REXCO) Limited was also given approval in the meeting. It would be a Public Enterprise under the absolute ownership of  Rajasthan government. The formation of REXCO would help more than 2 lakh ex-servicemen of Rajasthan in many ways besides providing employment on contract basis to ex-servicemen and widow of ex-servicemen and their dependents.

The State Cabinet approved a customised package to the proposed projects of Regen Powertech Pvt Ltd to establish a manufacturing unit for Wind Electric Generators, Rotor Blades near Udaipur and L M Wind Power Blades (India) Pvt Ltd.