In a letter to CEC member secretary M K Jiwrajka, Bhushan has expressed hope that the CEC would recommend to the Supreme Court “to order a criminal investigation leading to prosecution of all those involved in carrying out illegal mining (and those who have aided and abetted the same by their acts of omission and commission) by the CBI, or an SIT, which is outside the control and supervision of the Government of Karnataka”.

He has called for investigation outside the supervision of the Karnataka government as “the open and flagrant collusion of the political and administrative executive with the illegal mining lobby has emasculated the official investigative agencies of the State, including the CID”.

Three CMs

Bhushan, who is representing the petitioners, Samaja Parivartana Samudaya, has pointed that they have provided evidence for the direct involvement of three successive chief ministers in supporting illegal mining and transportation of minerals from forest areas. 

The “three chief ministers” refers to N Dharam Singh, H D Kumaraswamy, and the incumbent B S Yeddyurappa.

“Individuals from the mining lobby, aside from getting themselves elected to the State Assembly from various political parties, also occupy positions of power in the State Cabinet. The mining lobby virtually runs the State government. 

“The complete collapse of governance is evident from the inaction of the government in the wake of the report of the honourable Lokayukta and inaction on the FIRs filed for various offences related to illegal mining,” writes Bhushan.

Ban mining in Bellary

The lawyer has also hoped that the CEC would recommend a complete ban on all mining in Bellary forest areas to facilitate the “the restoration of the ecology of the region, regeneration of the forests, recuperation of the wildlife and the rediscovery by the local people of their traditional modes of livelihood by agriculture, animal husbandry and associated activities”.

Bhushan has also urged the CEC to take note of the writings on Sandur taluk of Bellary by M Krishnan (1912-1996), a famous ecologist employed by the Maharaja of Sandur in the 1940s. Bhushan writes “...he has left behind a detailed record of the magnificent ecology, environment, flora and fauna of the region. The destruction of this ecological niche on account of illegal mining is a sad commentary of our times.”

The CEC report on illegal mining is expected to be be submitted next week.ADVERTISEMENT