Dear Sir
Presently I am doing my first year BE, but it isn’t my passion. I want to join the Indian Army. As I am a girl, I am unaware how to get into the army. What exams should I be taking? Are there any limitations for girls?
A student

Dear Student,
Girls are being given opportunities, after graduation, to enter the Army, Navy and Air Force. Openings exist in technical, administration, legal, education, logistics branches, and lately also in aviation etc. Since you are doing engineering, you are eligible to apply for Short Service Commission through university entry when you are in your final year, into the Engineering Stream.  Otherwise, after you complete your graduation, you can apply for the Combined Defence Services Exam and get into a variety of branches.  If your performance is good, after completion of 14 years, you stand a fair chance of being given a Permanent Commission and then you can aspire for higher ranks and serve till your retirement age. For all details, look up the official websites www.joinindianarmy.nic.in, www.careerairforce.nic.in

Dear Sir,
I am doing my ITI industrial training institute in Dandeli. I have completed my SSLC in 2012 in Belagavi, Karnataka, and due to some financial problems, could not continue my education. In the year 2014, I got a seat in ITI (computer operating programme assistant). It is a one-year course. I would like to  join the Indian Navy, but I don’t have any knowledge about it. Could you please help me. I want to live my dream of joining the Indian Navy. I don’t have any family or friends in the Navy who can guide me. Please help me out.
Agnes Suzan

Dear Agnes,
Do not worry about your not being able to pursue higher education due to financial limitations. With your qualification you can aspire to join the Navy or Air Force as a non-commissioned officer (minimum qualifications 12th or 10th + technical diploma). Once you are selected and have completed your training, you can earn while you learn, since armed forces give you ample opportunities for higher studies.  Get details of naval recruitment from their official website  www.nausena-bharti.nic.in

Dear Sir,
I am studying in class X. I am interested in aerospace engineering. I am confused as to which subjects I should take in PU. I am interested in Science and Mathematics. Is IIT the only option for this or can I enter the field through any other process, like the Indian Institute of Science or NIT? I am also confused as to which engineering course I should take up for aerospace engineering after PUC? If IIT is the only option, should I take training in the 10th standard itself? And what are the exams I must take up for entering IIT? Please guide me.
Disha

Dear Disha,
Aerospace engineering is now being offered by many colleges all over the country, though some of them may not have the reputation or standard of the IITs etc.  You can enter the aerospace industry either by directly doing a BTech in that branch, or even a degree in mechanical, electronics, telecommunication, instrumentation etc., and then specialising at the postgraduate level. You may take up PCMCs or PCME for your PUC and prepare for various entrance exams such as JEE for IITs, NITs and Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology (www.jeemain.­nic.in), CET for state engineering colleges, and individual exams by private universities like Jain, Amrita, VIT Vellore etc.

Dear Sir,
My daughter just wrote her II PUC (PCMB) exam and is preparing for CET. She is good at Biology and Chemistry and she likes Science very much. She is 75 per cent disabled (physically handicapped). She is doing her best with the help of artificial leg. So what type of courses and jobs are suitable for her? Are there any reservations for disabled people and any helping groups for her education. Please guide us with details.
R Chowda Reddy

Dear Reddy,
You and your daughter need to be congratulated for overcoming the severe disability and moving ahead to make a good career and future. Special quota is available not only in CET and competitive exams for persons with disability, but even in employment, there is a quota under Persons with Disability Act, 1995. Since she is interested in Science, she may give the KVPY exam (www.kvpy.org.in), which will get her admission into IISc or one of the five IISERs etc. She will also get a scholarship while studying, and that field will not require too much of walking or travelling, and very rewarding jobs will be available in both government and private sector.

Dear Sir,
I am currently pursuing a BCA degree. But my interest lies in animal welfare. I want to know if there are any courses which I can pursue in the field of animal welfare. I especially want to do my bit for wild animals. Please guide in this matter.
Namratha

Dear Namratha
It is good to see your interest in animal welfare.  You may have to move into zoological sciences and build up your skills at the basic level before you can seek admission in PG courses in institutions like Wildlife Institute of India (www.wli.gov.in). 

Alternatively, you can explore some universities that offer Animal Psychology as an elective in their Masters in Psychology programmes.

The third option would be to take up a Master’s in Social Work, which is available in all reputed universities, then gain experience by working in an NGO or institution that works for animal welfare.