The recent boat tragedy, which claimed the lives of six tourists of a family from Chennai who had come on a picnic to Hogenakkal falls, is a proof of the neglect of safety measures at the popular tourist destination.

ADVERTISEMENTThe lives of the six victims could have been saved if the safety measures had been followed and they were provided with life jackets before getting into the coracle. 

Hundreds of tourists descend on the falls from all parts of the State, Tamil Nadu and other states everyday during monsoon season. Those who are adventurous wish to take a ride in coracles in the river without any life jackets risking their lives. 

They get excited watching the falls from near and start moving when mishaps tend to occur, which cannot be averted even by the person who ferries the coracle.

Life jackets like unused 

The Chamarajanagar district administration has issued permission to 197 coracles to ferry tourists from Karnataka border to Tamil Nadu border and back. 

According to Forest Department officials, 150 life jackets have been provided free of cost for the benefit of tourists. There are more than 200 rowers. But a majority of the tourists do not prefer to wear life jackets. Even when they are forced to wear, they do not use them. Tragedies occur due to negligence, they added.

Heavy load

According to the norms, a coracle has to ferry only six persons at a time and a fee of Rs 110 is being collected from each tourist and a receipt is issued. It is alleged that the rowers bargain with the tourists and ferry more than six persons. 

When the coracle goes closer to the falls, it starts to shake due to the force of the water and if the load is more than suggested, it loses balance and capsizes.

There are also complaints that youth, under the influence of liquor, do not listen to the warnings of the rowers, which results in mishaps. There are no rescue teams either in Tamil Nadu or in Karnataka.

Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary Deputy Conservator of Forests K V Vasantha Reddy told 
Deccan Herald that the tourists are advised to follow safety measures and handbills are being distributed to them in this regard. 

Free life jackets too have been distributed by the Forest department, he added.
Following the tragedy, the department has issued strict orders to ferry only the tourists who wear life jackets, Reddy said.