The Forest department is quietly pushing the State government to approve the extension of Pushpagiri Wildlife Sanctuary (PWS) and include Gundia basin in it so that the area is better protected from commercial exploitation.

ADVERTISEMENTAccording to Forest department officials, the primary reason for the move is that it has been over three years since the Central government gave, in principal, clearance for expanding the PWS and include Gundia into it. And the most important reason is to stop any hydro projects from coming up there in future, especially after the Centre has approved the Kasturirangan report. “The Madhav Gadgil report had stated that no works can take place in and around the pristine Western Ghats. But the Kasturirangan report states that hydro projects may be permitted if 30 per cent of the water flow is maintained during lean season so that marine wildlife is not affected. The Kasturirangan report had opened the window for projects, which can be misused. 

Though all proposals go through the State wildlife board and forest conservation committee as per the Act, it will be difficult to stop projects, especially if they would come from the government. Thus we are now trying to get State government clearance and notification for the extension of the PWS as early as possible,” an official said.

The proposal has been lying with the government for past three years. Presently, two small hydro power projects are operating and a dozen proposals are lying with the forest department for clearance.

Gundia river basin, according to officials is the tailor made for such projects, which is the reason why the State government has not cleared the file. In the past, the government, without getting the approval of Ministry of Environment and Forests had laid the foundation stone too but later work was stalled following the intervention of the then union environment minister Jairam Ramesh.

The Karnataka Power Corporation Limited had proposed to generate 400MW of power in two phases on Gundia river, a tributary of Nethravathi. They had proposed to acquire 113 hectares of forest land and over 263 hectares of revenue land.
Another reason for expanding the PWS is to extend the area and connect it with Kudremukh and provide a conflict-free elephant corridor. This was also accepted in the last state wildlife board meeting, held in August.

While files are moving quickly in the State government again for final notification and approval, officials in Mangalore and Hassan said that they had not received any information to survey and define the exact boundary.

Kempehole in Gundia basin is an elephant corridor and a notified forest area abutting the wildlife sanctuary. Tigers too frequent the area. According to Bombay Natural History Society and International Bird Conservation Network it also houses endangered bird species. 

The forest patch also houses rare and endemic wildlife species including the Indirana gundia frog species (named after former Prime Minister Indira Gandhi).