Jammu and Kashmir government will soon provide weapons to Forest Protection Force (FPF) personnel to curb activities of timber smuggling mafia in the state. 

Sources told Deccan Herald that the government has given the clearance to provide 100 rifles and 50 pistols to the FPF personnel in the initial phase. “The weapons are lying in the custody of police department for years and would be allotted to the FPF in coming months,” they added.

Official records reveal payment of Rs 3,70,656 had been made eight years back for procuring ammunition for FPF.

According to a government order, the FPF will procure 10,000 rounds of .303 BDR cartridges and 5,000 9mm ball cartridges in first phase.

J&K minister for forests and environment Mian Altaf also confirmed that government is serious in arming FPF to prevent timber smuggling. 

“In the first phase, weapons would be provided to FPF personnel in a few divisions where timber smuggling is more rampant,” Altaf told Deccan Herald.

While forest officials had been pleading helplessness in facing the armed timber smugglers till now, this initiative will give an edge to them in their fight against the timber mafia.

Altaf who is considered a ‘clean’ minister in Omar Abullah government acknowledged that due to denial of arms to FPF guards “the smugglers had been felling trees and carrying out transportation of the timber with confidence in certain areas.”

Sources said the minister took up the issue of providing weapons to FPF with the J&K chief minister after a recent attack carried out by smugglers on forest officials in notorious Pir Panjal division. 

Brazen attack

A divisional forest officer was seriously injured in the brazen attack.
“Altaf spoke to police and other agencies, who had prevented supply of arms to FPF since its inception in December 1996. He made it clear to them that no dilly-dallying and hurdles would be tolerated anymore,” they added.

The FPF guards, a special unit of the forest department created to tackle the smugglers, have to battle smugglers armed with axes, pistols and sometimes even AK-47s.
Joint Director FPF, Mian Javed said armed guards will now be in a better position to deter timber smugglers. 

“We don’t need to hit anybody directly, but at least it will give our guards a sense of security to fight smugglers who are always armed,” he told Deccan Herald.

FPF will gets weapons in Pir Panjal, Shopian and Rafiabad forest divisions initially, he said.
Javed said their duties included road patrols, ‘nakkas’ on strategic routes, off-road patrols in vulnerable forest areas and intelligence gathering through jungle observation posts. 

76 forest officials killed 
ADVERTISEMENTIn hundreds of attack on unarmed employees, timber smugglers and militants have killed 76 forest officials in the Valley since the outbreak of armed insurgency in 1989-90.

The most senior official to be gunned down by suspected militants was Conservator of South Kashmir, Pervez Qadiri. He was kidnapped while on tour of Brangi project in south Kashmir’s Kokernag area in 1990. Mian Javed had managed to escape in that incident.

In 1994, suspected militants shot dead Mohammad Ashraf Mir while he was posted as Divisional Manager of J&K State Forest Corporation in 1994. Two more Range Officers were killed, one each in north Kashmir’s Kupwara and south Kashmir’s Bijbehara areas. 

The RO gunned down in Bijbehara belonged to the Kashmiri Pandit community. In 1999, militants killed range officer of Wildlife Protection Department, Ghulam Ahmad Ridshi, allegedly on account of his close association with the then ruling National Conference.  

He was eliminated in an ambush in Tral area, though he lived in protection for several years in a CRPF-guarded hotel on Boulevard in Srinagar.

Once again, unidentified persons burned a local forester namely Ghulam Ahmad Shah to death in Tral. 

In 1997, smugglers hacked to death a forest guard of Pir Panjal division near his 
residential village of Sonpah, Beerwah, in Budgam district.

Former smuggler Sonaullah Zargar who used to work as a guard was killed by timber smugglers on 21 June 2011 allegedly in connivance with forest department officials.
Four smugglers and block forest officer Abdul Gani War were arrested in connection with Zargar’s murder, which is a grim reminder of the brutality that timber mafia is capable of unleashing.

Local media had also reported alleged involvement of then DFO Pir Panjal, Ghulam Hassan Bhat in the murder. 

However, Bhat was never called for police questioning due to his close proximity with top officials in the department.Law of jungle  

* Conservator of South Kashmir, Pervez Qadiri was abducted and gunned down by militants in 1990.
*  Assistant conservator of forest Mohammad Ashraf Mir posted as divisional manager of J&K State Forest Corporation was shot dead in 1994.
* Former smuggler Sonaullah Zargar working as a forest guard was killed by timber smugglers on 21 June 2011 allegedly in connivance with the forest department 
officials.