In last few years, the City has been rapidly expanding. New colonies are developing and people are moving away from the city centre. And one of the most common problems faced by those living on the outskirts are their encounters with snakes, birds and monkeys. 

ADVERTISEMENTWhile many resort to killing these animals, there are others who call snake catchers or contact NGOs to solve the problem. Even the Bangalore Bruhat Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) helps the common man out in these situations through its Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation Cell. Officials with the body say that the rise in population has made humans venture into forest and other green areas, giving rise to man-animal conflicts. The cell has witnessed a sharp rise in panic calls from residents with complaints of reptile menace in their gardens, kitchens and bathrooms. 

The cell receives at least 50 calls a day, asking for snake catchers. With only 33 wildlife rescuers and 12 volunteers, the cell is doing an arduous job of keeping a vigil on 198 wards with a population of over one crore. In fact, in the last three months, there have been close to 1,543 cases of wild animals — including birds, reptiles and mammals — being rescued in the City.

“Often, people forget that the growth of the City also means that people are eating into the space of these animals. So it is common, especially in the rain, for snakes to come out or even for birds to get trapped inside houses,” says Brijesh Kumar, the chief conservator of forest. Agrees Sukanya, a professional, who lives near Sarjapur and has had a snake come into her garden recently. “Most of these areas were used for agriculture activities, which attracted snakes that eat rodents. But with urbanisation and decrease in agricultural activities, the reptiles end up venturing into the houses,” she says.

Kiran, an entrepreneur, still recollects that when he first moved to Koramangala in 2005, there were a number of snakes in the vicinity. “Now that the area is developed, their number has reduced to an extent but I still find a couple of them now and then. But they are harmless. They strike only when humans attack them,” he adds. 

Krupa, a professional, had recently called the BBMP’s cell when a small squirrel got trapped in her house. She says that it is always better to call a professional than try to deal with the animal ourselves. “Though the volunteer did take time to come to the house, it was really helpful as I didn’t know how to handle the situation. When the volunteer came, he knew exactly how to catch the squirrel and handle it without hurting it,” adds Krupa, who lives near Meenakshi Temple, Bannerghatta Road. 

The maximum calls come from the newly-added wards and volunteers find it hard to reach such places on time. “This is not an obligatory service that we provide, it is a gesture of goodwill. We often receive panic calls from people and we send our volunteers, who may take time to reach. But the animals are taken to rehabilitation centres across the cities. If the animal is injured, it is cured and later freed,” adds Brijesh. While Ranganath, a volunteer, explains that the main reason for panic among many is the lack of awareness.

“The first thing we ask people who call us is to describe the animal to us, so that we come prepared. But most of them, in fear, rarely get a good look at the animal. So we just ask them to calm down and to wait till we arrive. Once we reach and rescue the animal, we also brief people on how to handle the situation the next time. There may not be a permanent solution to the man-animal conflict but at least with more volunteers, we can increase our reach somewhat,” he says.