Tiger numbers in the country has seen a 30 per cent increase in the last four years, this is more a result of efficient data collection methods than actual growth in their population, say experts.
ADVERTISEMENTThis National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) data, should serve as a reminder for the State government to increase measures to mitigate man-animal conflict in the fringes of tiger reserves, they add.

Speaking to Deccan Herald, wildlife expert Ajay Desai, who was also part of the tiger census at Nilgiri Biosphere, said the current data does not mean that the carrying capacity of the reserves has increased.

 Referring to Western Ghats, which has the world’s largest tiger population, he said there will only be a minor variation in the number of tigers at Rajiv Gandhi National Park, Nagarhole and Bandipur Tiger Reserve, as their carrying capacity has already reached a saturation point. 

“Identification of tigers in reserves, where tigers have not been surveyed in the past, such as MM Hills Sanctuary, parts of Sathyamangalam Tiger Reserve has contributed to the numbers,” he said.

This also means that past surveys had not comprehensively assessed tiger numbers in the country. Certain tiger habitats were not included and the Forest department lacked adequate staff to carry out such surveys in the past. 

The current estimate too is not comprehensive as surveys are still ongoing in some areas.

The summary report of the survey is necessary to assess the variation in the tiger population from the previous surveys and to know the contribution from areas considered for the first time.

He said the Western Ghats stretch has scope to accommodate more tigers, provided suitable habitat and prey density is available. “The increase has been only nominal. In MM Hills, only nine tigers were found, whereas the total area of the sanctuary has enough territory for more cats. Overall, focus should be to accommodate the rise in tiger numbers,” he said.

Man-animal conflict

The tiger numbers have also increased the fear of man-animal conflict, especially in South Interior Karnataka, which has the highest number of tiger reserves in the State. Desai noted that there will be an “automatic increase” in conflict on the fringes of the reserves. This, he said, could be addressed by reducing the dependency of forest fringe communities and by working with them in conservation efforts.

Ajai Mishra, Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, said carrying capacity is a relative term, as it could be increased by improving the habitat.

On the recent tiger attacks reported on the fringes of reserves, he said the Forest department had succeeded in mitigating the conflict. “However, awareness programmes among communities living on the fringes of these reserves will be essential to avoid loss of life and property,” he said.

Mishra said that there were 406 tigers in various sanctuaries of the State and some reserve forests are being upgraded as protected areas, to create a network among the reserves.