For the last two decades, Narain Karthikeyan has been doing all he can to keep his one true passion alive — motor racing. Fighting the odds and the ups and downs in his career, he faces each day with a smile, a strong will and a healthy approach to competition.

ADVERTISEMENTTalking about the scope of the sport in India, he tells Metrolife that the times are a lot better than when he started off. “It’s much better than it used to be. There’s a lot of infrastructure in place now but one has to dedicate enough time and put a lot of hard work into the sport. It doesn’t come easy and the problem is that people think it does,” says Narain, adding that the exposure to Formula One in the country is big and ever growing. 

Ask him to describe what being behind the wheel means to him and he replies, “I think I just go into a zone which is hard to describe. You just try and do the best that you can. I drive a Porsche 911 and have a host of other cars. I also find the new Jaguar XKRS very impressive.” He mentions that racing was the only sport he ever truly loved given that he “wasn’t good or too interested in any other sport to be a professional at it”.

Being the first Formula One motor racing driver from India was quite a challenge for him, he recalls. “Because you’re the first, you become the face for Indian motor sports. And with that, the criticism I have occasionally faced in my career was bound to happen. But I do my own thing and believe in myself. People believe in me. If you have that equation, you just do what you have to. It’s always tough for the guy who has to do it first,” confesses the racer, who recently completed the Auto GP World series. 

He elaborates that it’s even tougher to do what you love doing while representing your country in the world arena. “Sometimes I think I was too early for the times. If I was Narain now and just beginning, it would have been a lot easier. But somebody had to do it and I’m glad I did. I’m proud to be an Indian. Being an Indian has helped a great deal in many ways,” says Narain.

When you race as much as he does, the adrenaline rush and feeling of being on-the-go rarely ever runs dry. “I used to be a little too strict with myself but I try to relax these days. I do a lot of wildlife photography and cycling when I’m free,” he says, adding, “I spend so much time in the race tracks, hotels and planes that it’s hard for me to do anything else. It’s just a way of life. I’ve been used to doing this for 20 years.”

On his fitness regimen, he notes, “It’s basically just healthy living. I do a lot of physical exercises, especially reflexes. You just have to keep your body in top condition as an athlete because it helps you over the course of the race.”