Fresh hope for sufferers of lazy eye

University of Maryland-led research team has found a new hope for treating “lazy eye” and other serious visual problems that are usually permanent unless they are corrected in early childhood. 

Amblyopia afflicts about three percent of the population, and is a widespread cause of vision loss in children. 

It occurs when both eyes are structurally normal, but mismatched – either misaligned, or differently focused, or unequally receptive to visual stimuli because of an obstruction such as a cataract in one eye. 

During the so-called “critical period” when a young child’s brain is adapting very quickly to new experiences, the brain builds a powerful neural network connecting the stronger eye to the visual cortex. 

But the weaker eye gets less stimulation and develops fewer synapses, or points of connection between neurons. 

Over time the brain learns to ignore the weaker eye. 

Mild forms of amblyopia such as “lazy eye” result in problems with depth perception. In the most severe form, deprivation amblyopia, a cataract blocks light and starves the eye of visual experiences, significantly altering synaptic development and seriously impairing vision.

Arctic sea-ice loss’ debilitating effects on wildlife revealed

With sea ice at its lowest point in 1,500 years, ecological communities in the Arctic are being affected by its continued and even accelerated melting over the next decades, a new study has revealed. 

Eric Post, a Penn State University professor of biology, and an international team of scientists have examined relationships among algae, plankton, whales, and terrestrial animals such as caribou, arctic foxes, and walrus; as well as the effects of human exploration of previously inaccessible parts of the region. 

“Our team set out to explore the ‘domino effect’ of sea-ice loss on marine animals, as well as on land-dwelling species living adjacent to ice,” Post said. “Arctic sea ice should be thought of as a biome or an ecosystem and the effects of melting and warming on microorganisms living under ice in this biome already have received much attention. 

However, those animals living near the ice likely are feeling the effects, as well,” he said. 
Post explained that, after reaching its record low in August of 2012, sea ice is expected to continue to melt at an accelerating rate.

An app to help night blindness sufferers

Researchers in Pakistan have developed a smartphone app that keeps track of your location and distance walked from home or hotel and warns you when you are likely to be caught out after dark to help sufferers of the debilitating disease of night blindness. The app can also help travellers with the disease pinpoint hotels.

Kamran Ahsan, Obaid Khan and Abdul Salam of the Federal Urdu University of Arts, Science and Technology, in Karachi, explain how night blindness, nyctalopia, afflicts millions and may be present at birth as a genetic disease, arise in childhood through malnutrition or injury or be a symptom of numerous eye diseases. 

The smartphone app will allow sufferers to safely leave their home knowing that their phone is keeping track of their whereabouts and can calculate both the remaining daylight hours available and estimate how long it will take the person to reach their base before nightfall. ADVERTISEMENT