Photography seems to be the passion of many. Hence, it is all the more difficult to make a mark for oneself in the field. 

ADVERTISEMENTHowever, Chandana Puttalingaiah, a student of Bharatiya Vidyapeeth School of Photography, stands out in the crowd of photographers with her outstanding works which have been receiving great acclaim not just in the City but even in places like Mumbai and Pune. 

   Having done BA from Jain College, Chandana worked in IBM as a procurement specialist for three years before realising that photography was her true calling. “When work got monotonous, it took me a while to figure out what I wanted to do. Then I enrolled for this one-and-a-half year course of diploma in photography (advertising and commercial) at the BVSP,” she says.  

While she started off photographing food and still life and even shot for the BBC Good Food twice, she moved on to abstract photography later. 

Her image of a number of broken bulbs was so impressive that it won her the title of the ‘Most Noteworthy Performer’ at ‘Albus Atrum’, a photography exhibition at the BVSP. 

Recalling the efforts she put into this photograph, she says, “There was no philosophy behind it. I just wanted to shoot something unconventional. The image came about as and when I started shooting.” 

One of the more profound images that she shot was the head of a mannequin surrounded by scissors. 

It may seem abstract at first but on a closer look, one will realise the concept behind it — ‘female infanticide’. “This image was a very clear thought,” she notes. Slowly, Chandana also got into street photography. “It is photo journalism of sorts and fun in its own way as one can just go with the flow,” she says.  

Speaking of the different fields of photography, be it abstract, still life or street, she says that each one comes with its own set of challenges. “We are dealing with different textures in each case and each one reacts to light differently. 

But there are three things that a photographer needs to keep in mind while shooting — the theme he or she wants to convey, how the light reacts to a particular texture and the overall composition of a picture,” she explains.  “It’s definitely more challenging to actually shoot a particular image than imagining it in your head,” she adds. 

Ask her about the outburst of wedding and wildlife photographers in the market and she feels that photography can be an easy hobby but a tough career. 

“As a hobby, it’s a lot of fun. It’s relaxing and helps people move out of the mundane and explore the artist in them. But on a professional level, it’s more challenging as your client can be very demanding. It’s difficult as you are dealing with deadlines on a creative level. It’s not an easy career,” she reveals. 

She now plans to work with a group of like-minded people in Mumbai. In fact, she has already started working with them. “We all met at the institute and have a common interest,” she sums up.