Corridors for safe passage of wildlife are now occupied by human settlements, highways, etc.ADVERTISEMENTMan-animal conflict is on the increase especially where there is a sizeable wildlife population. The neighbourhood populated areas of forests and wildlife sanctuaries are prone to attack from wildlife. 

There are many reasons cited for such an unfortunate occurrence that drives man to extreme measures against wildlife like setting up traps, poisoning, electrifying fences, digging deathly pits, shooting and so on. The burgeoning population is one of the main reasons why such a man-animal conflict is increasing day by day. Deforestation is another issue that has made the wildlife seek food and water elsewhere. 

What used to be corridors for safe passage of wildlife are now occupied by human settlements, highways and illegal encroachment. Use of highways through wildlife sanctuaries is another issue that has caused deaths and injuries to wildlife in their own habitat. 

Highways passing through Nagarhole and Bandipur forests in Karnataka are closed during certain hours of the night to protect wildlife. Speed regulations within the forests should be strictly enforced and drivers should be told to keep a watch out on crossing of wildlife and that wildlife give priority. 

Some of these ticklish issues such as night traffic and encroachment are under consideration though effective solutions are yet to be implemented to safeguard wildlife. We need to take all stakeholders into confidence and arrive at agreed solutions. Also, we need committed and well-motivated park rangers/staff that could take care of the interest of wildlife without fear or favour. Presently, they are ill equipped with obsolete arms and ammunition and poor communication. 

Moreover, they are poorly paid, which is the reason why the career in wildlife management is not attractive enough for the educated and motivated persons. Thus, the present wildlife sanctuary staff is no match for encroachers and poachers who have their eyes on wildlife as easy money-making objects. 

They kill wildlife remorselessly as their greed knows no bounds. Unfortunately, there are buyers, both domestic and foreign, for wildlife parts, though such trade is banned internationally. There are middlemen and unscrupulous traders who dare the law and carry on their nefarious activities. 

Stricter checks and detriment punishments should be awarded for those harming wildlife and those who deal with wildlife parts sale/purchase. The report that the Karnataka government is setting up a Special Tiger Protection Force (STPF) in the State Forest Department is welcome news. 

At last we would have a team of dedicated and highly motivated individuals who would protect wildlife. This is an initiative under the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA). There is also a need for other state governments to set up such bodies. Wildlife protectionWhether villagers and tribals residing inside forests and wildlife park sanctuaries should be relocated is a matter of debate and discussion. Some believe that villagers and tribals should be stakeholders in the management of wildlife protection and so they should be encouraged to be part of the efforts to protect wildlife. 

They feel that there is no need for relocation of the people residing inside. There is often a bond between the wildlife and the humans due to generations of living together harmoniously. Mostly it’s the outside elements that poach on wildlife. 

There are always black sheep within any community who could be aiding and abetting the poachers due to lure of money. However, that does not mean the entire population of forest dwellers should be blamed for the aberration. Identifying black sheep and counselling might help them reform. Much more needs to be done to make forests and wildlife sanctuaries safe for wildlife. Core areas of sanctuaries might have to be made free of any human habitation and those displaced provided space for settling down right inside the forest/sanctuaries barring the core areas where wildlife should be supreme. 

The tribals and villagers should be roped in as stakeholders to protect forest wealth including flora and fauna. Suitable jobs should be offered for the youth to live a dignified life, with offer of forest-based jobs such as guides, guards, and volunteers as part of eco-tourism projects. Finance may be provided for the forest dwellers to set up home-stay / safari facilities that could cater to the needs of visitors. As far as possible, wildlife should stay within the safe havens of the forests and the wildlife sanctuaries. 

To facilitate movement of wildlife, safe corridors should be designated and protected effectively. Poachers should be identified and strict action taken such gangs who loot nation’s wildlife wealth. Those dealing with wildlife parts should be caught and fined / imprisoned as deterrent punishment.