With relative peace on Line of Control (LoC), the population of rare mountain goat markhor has steadily increased along the Kashmir border that runs through the goat’s habitat.

ADVERTISEMENTSince declaration of truce between India and Pakistan in 2003, the number of markhor (Capra Falconeri) has increased to over 300 from around 100 in 2005, said wildlife warden Suhail Ahmad, who is looking after the conservation of markhors in J&K. “One of the main reasons behind their growing population is peace on border. The markhor was scared away or died in regular artillery duels between Indian and Pakistani troops along the Kashmir border,” he said and added that they were not seen for years before the ceasefire.

The markhor, sporting a shaggy winter coat ranging from light brown to black, is the world’s largest species of goat with trademark spiralling horns that can grow more than a metre long. 

That also makes the animal prized for traditional Asian medicine.

“There is a significant increase in the number of goats now. The recent wildlife survey census in Jammu and Kashmir shows the presence of at least 300 animals,” the officer said. 

He said around 250 of these goats are in Qazinag wildlife park in north Kashmir, while around 50 are in Hirpora park in south Kashmir. 

However, he said, the 10 feet high electrified fence along the LoC Control was the worry for their sustainability. “The fence passes through the markhor’s natural habitat,” he said.
After 2003, the army built a barbed wire fence along much of the LoC to stop incursions of militants from Pakistan Occupied Kashmir. 

The official said the fencing also affected the migration of the animals.

An ongoing survey of Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) and Jammu and Kashmir wildlife department supported by Chester Zoo, UK in 2011 has confirmed the presence of the species also in Poonch in Jammu region.

Even as the survey continues, the J&K wildlife department has initiated a recovery plan. 
The plan focuses on continued detailed research, awareness among locals, herders, army and police for keeping this area intact.

Markhor, the world’s largest goat, is listed as endangered in the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 and the Wildlife Protection Act, J&K. With a global population of less than 2,500 mature individuals, it is found in northern India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. The Kashmir markhor, also known as flare-horned markhor, is present only in Jammu and Kashmir.