Poaching continues to be a major threat and India’s reported tiger deaths related to poaching have reached an all time high in 2016, according to World Wildlife Fund for Nature (WWF).

On Global Tiger Day, the WWF urged tiger-range governments to strengthen anti-poaching efforts and crack down on the severe wildlife snaring crisis that is threatening wildlife across Asia, especially the world’s remaining wild tigers, which number only around 3,900. 

Easy to make from widely available material such as bicycle cable wires and quick to set up, wire snares are deadly traps that are fast becoming the plague of Asia’s forests. Driven by the growing illegal wildlife trade, which is now reaching an estimated US$20 billion annually makes wildlife trafficking the world's 4th largest illicit trade, after narcotics, human trafficking and trade in the counterfeit goods, according to a press statement of WWF.

In India, reported tiger deaths related to poaching reached an all time high in 2016. These reported figures might represent only a fraction of actual mortality. Electrocution and poisoning of the big cats have also been recorded across tiger habitats. With wildlife traps and electric wires embedded deep into the ground or hid among debris, the detection of these devices are often difficult and missed by forest guards who manually patrol our forests to ensure protection of our wildlife. 

TRAFFIC India introduced Deep Search Metal Detectors (DSMD) in 2008 which have been distributed to Tiger Reserves across the country. The DSMDs help in detecting traps/snares, wires and other metal devices even buried up-to 7 feet below the ground or debris. 

Local communities also play an integral role in the protection of biodiversity and ecosystems. In India approximately 45 mn people live in forest-fringe areas and more than 300mn people are dependent on forests for subsistence and cash livelihoods. Engagement of local communities is thus a key constituent in conservation efforts and can lead the way in helping reduce poaching and managing human-tiger interactions in the country. 

Speaking about the importance of community involvement to reduce poaching, Ravi Singh, Secretary General and CEO, WWF-India said, “WWF-India has been working with communities on holistic approaches to conservation. Making them primary stakeholders in the protection of forests and its wildlife can go a long way in enhancing anti-poaching efforts of the country.”