Annual Tour of Nilgiris (TFN) 2013, a eight day cycle expedition will be launched on December 16 in Bangalore, which will arrive to Mysore on the same day. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe Team of 103 riders including (including 15 overseas and 12 women riders) covering a distance of around 800 km across Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu. Starting from Bangalore,cyclists will pedal through Mysore, Ooty, Sultan Bathery, Madikeri and finish the tour by riding back to Mysore on December 23 to conclude the Montra Tour of Nilgiris 2013. 

The enthusiasts will cycle through three wildlife sanctuaries in the Western Ghats. Riders can opt to ride individually or as a team and the competitive distance will not be longer than 40 kms on any day. The TFN will also witness charity riders who will ride to support social initiatives of Aarohi and Vidyodaya society. 

The cycle tour is also aimed to revive the cycle culture by popularising cycle as a mode of transport for the twin benefits of easing traffic congestion and being environmental friendly. Through the event TFN is keen to communicate the challenges of global warming and pollution. 

The tour will be covered through GPS tracking of every rider and medical support through a medical team and ambulance assistance, which ensures blanket of security to the riders. Sridhar Pabisetty, Co-Founder of Ride A Cycle Foundation (RAC-F) said that cycling is the need of the hour owing to its various benefits like sustainable transport, cycle and eco-tourism, local tourism, social awareness, technology window, health benefits and others.  

He said that RAC-F intends to promote cycling with the Tour of Nilgiris where the riders will get a chance to pedal across the picturesque Western Ghats and the nature behind them.

Operation Head of the tour, Deepak Majipatil said that the highlight of the tour is that riders will have opportunity to experience ‘King of Mountains’ climb to Kalhatty from Masinagudi to Ooty.   

For details log on to www.tourofnilgiris.com.