Weaving their surreal magic, monsoons transform the state, leaving it invigorated and refreshed, writes A Varsha Rao.ADVERTISEMENTHundreds had gathered. Men in their pristine white dhotis and women in their colourful saris were jostling for space in a crowd that had assembled to witness the procession of Kyatharappa – a fiery God. 

At another place, a homa (special puja) was being performed by a certain Pendakur Irrapanna in his village, where, people had gathered with folded arms and sincere devotion. 

If you are wondering what the rituals signified, then here is the answer. They were yearly rituals that were performed in the village of Narayandevarakere (that now lies submerged under the Tungabhadra river), to bring the rain gods to earth. 

Be it a drizzle or a downpour, rains have always fascinated scores of people who wait with baited breath every year. When they finally arrive over the coast, heralding the start of the monsoons, they display such grandeur that can put any cynic to shame. Thunder and lightning accompanied by gusty winds put on a spectacular show. Owing to a low pressure created over the land due to intense summer, the clouds from the Indian Ocean move towards this low pressure area and discharge the water collected. 

The westerly winds hits the coast of the state first and then proceeds towards the interiors of the state. Arriving in the coastal town of Mangalore soon after Kerala, rains transform every inch of the area they pass upon. 

Most of the rainforests that fall in the monsoon’s path are replenished and rejuvenated. Some of the wettest places in Karnataka include Agumbe, Hulikal, Shishila, Kumta and Savantvada among others. 

Amagaon in northern Karnataka had once recorded the highest rainfall in the state, stealing the title from Agumbe, which is termed as ‘Cherrapunji of the South’.Wet and wild

Instead of looking for exotic destinations to go to this monsoon, drive down to these villages to experience the true magic of rains. 

You can take a village tour and enjoy the enigma of rains or head to the luscious rainforest and sanctuaries that come to life with the monsoon.

Sail down the Sharavathi river, get up, close and personal with the wildlife at Bhadra Wildlife Sanctuary, soak in the rain in the coffee estates of Chikmagalur or trek in the Western Ghats of Shimoga district. The options are plenty. 

Monsoons offer not just a visual extravaganza but also a soulful auditory treat. The sound of rain hitting the ground, the sound of rain falling through cracks and crevices, the sound of sheets of rain pounding hard on the roofs, the cooing of birds, sounds of the crickets and frogs are all natural indulgences. Karnataka is home to some of the most spectacular waterfalls in the country. The Jog Falls, being the second highest plunge-waterfall in India takes form during the rainy season. Thick fog and mist covers the soaking wet rocks in Gaganchukki and Bharachukki Falls. Kunchikal, Varapoha, Gokak, Barkana and Hebbe Falls are just some of the places to watch out for. 

Two sides of the same coin

History is witness to the fact that monsoon is a season endeared by every single kingdom. The Vijayanagar rulers were excellent engineers and the presence of extensive network of tanks and canals stand as testimony. 

Through a series of tanks which were rain-fed, they ensured a perennial supply of water to their kingdom. These tanks, built by jalasutradars, collected the rainwater from the catchment areas and were so ingeniously designed that the upper ones were the source for the lower tanks thus ensuring efficient use of water and safety of the tanks. 

Monsoons have also been responsible for defeat of the mighty kingdom of Tipu Sultan in the Battle of Travancore. 

Tipu Sultan was gearing up for one last attack that would put Travancore in his hands, but the monsoons ruined his ambitious plan. 

The raging monsoons that year caused the Periyar river to flood and many of the Mysorean army soldiers were washed away by this sudden deluge. With his army reduced to miniscule numbers, his plan was thwarted.

A poetic enigma

Monsoons render any environ poetic. 

It is that time of the year when poets and writers are at their best and heart-warming works of art are born.

Noted writer U R Ananthamurthy says, “Stories written during the monsoons become beautiful novels. Without monsoons, there are no stories. My favourite poet of the monsoon is Bendre. It rained heavily in his works.”

Monsoons are important economically, culturally and environmentally too. Kharif crops need the tropical monsoons to sustain.

 Some of the main crops of Kharif include rice, paddy, millet, maize and tea among others. Farmers are dependent on the annual rainfall to safeguard their future. 

But there are many who do not depend on the monsoons completely.Mahesh, a farmer in Koppal taluk, says, “I don’t depend on the rains entirely. Borewells sustain my mango farming. Whenever it rains, the borewells get recharged and I use it to cultivate mangoes. I also believe in drip irrigation. Moreover, the areas in our vicinity have got a fair share of rains this year, more than the usual quota. So there is no scarcity as yet. In the months of April and May, we have received huge amount of rains but it has reduced in June.”

Quenching thirst

Kiran Kumar, Range Officer, Brahmagiri Wildlife Sanctuary says, “We wait eagerly for monsoons every year. 

They are a major source of the drinking needs of the wildlife. We are part of a rainforest so getting less rain or no rain at all severely affects our water sources. 

Perennial streams are turning seasonal now. To ensure that animals don’t go thirsty, we make gullies in streams and rivulets during the summer. 

This ensures a bank of water and promotes infiltration of water.” “With the huge downpour, the elephants come out in huge numbers. They find shelter in the numerous coffee plantations surrounding the forests. 

Moreover, their migratory route is broken thanks to the private plantations and their fences. So monsoons, indirectly lead to more stray elephants,” he adds.

Monsoons are fashionably late this time but are finally here. So, enjoy the rainy environment and don’t let it be just another rainy day. 

Take a heavenly trip to the monsoon destinations in the state or just sit back and enjoy Mother Nature’s interplay with the rain gods.