The emerging academic sub-discipline of ecopsychology examines the interrelationship between man and his environment through principles of both ecology and psychology. 

ADVERTISEMENTIt aims to evolve methods to emphasise the linkage between humans and their natural habitat with an objective to promote green-oriented lifestyles for harmony with nature. Besides being an upcoming movement in psychology developed by American scholars like Theodore Roszak, Mary Gomes, Allen Kanner, Paul Shepard and David Abram, ecopsychology is also a specialised academic discipline. 

This field extends beyond conservative ideas of modern psychology, which believes that mental activities and behaviour are products of individual and social factors alone. A central premise of ecopsychology is that even though human psychology is affected and shaped by the social world, its deeper structure is based on the natural environment in which it has evolved over time. Man’s wellbeing and existence are dependent on the natural habitat around him and therefore, destruction of the flora and fauna would only be at his peril. 

It’s an invisible connect 

Ecopsychology examines why people resort to environmentally damaging behaviour and how to develop methods of positive motivation for adopting sustainable practices. Research evidence also proposes that an individual’s relationship to nature can improve their interpersonal relationships and emotional wellbeing.

This discipline advocates that man is a part of nature and not a separate entity. However, human beings have developed a wrong notion that they have the power to control the planet. This prompts them to destroy nature to pursue developmental goals. For instance, agriculture which is integral to man’s survival on earth, demands deforestation. But this has a bearing on monsoons in terms of quantity and seasonality. While agriculture is inevitable for survival, man needs to deliberate over the level of technology used to disturb the environment. Take the case of the need to use chemicals as fertilisers or weedicides in coffee plantations, which drive honeybees away. Incidentally, the presence of honeybees increases coffee production by 10-15 per cent. 

Centuries ago, the human lifestyle was integrated with the flora and fauna around him, which made the protection of nature and wildlife a vital part of our cultural and social values. Ample evidence of man’s love for the environment is available in our myths, folklore, arts and religion. For instance, one can find small sacred pockets of forests near traditional homes in varied states in the country. 

Many plants and animals are considered sacred in India by various communities. The peacock is sacred to Lord Muruga in Tamil Nadu and was never hunted, while the blue rock pigeon was considered sacred to Saint Hazrat Shah Jalal and is protected in Bengal. Tiger and cobra, though greatly feared, were also offered protection from man on religious grounds. Similarly, the concept of indiscriminate felling of trees was not known. However, today in the guise of economic development and growth, environmental destruction has become an acceptable way of life.      

Ecopsychology is related to concepts of deep ecology, a contemporary philosophical movement, which affirms the inherent worth of all living and non-living beings regardless of their instrumental utility to human needs. It argues for the need to restructure modern human social systems that are in tune with nature. Ecopsychology assumes importance with the evolution of technology, which has empowered man to adversely impact the environment. This need to disturb the environment is driven by human greed for wealth. Over the years, man has destroyed the environment around him through the use of technology. This has proved dangerous with consequences like global warming, acid rain, drought, flood, landslide and earthquake. 

Ecopsychology proposes that if a culture is disconnected from nature, it has the potential to affect an individual’s physical and mental health. The fact that societies across the country and globe are increasingly afflicted with cancer and diabetes, suggests that man has distanced himself from nature and deviated onto a wrong path characterised by consumerism and fast food that manifests in unhealthy lifestyles. Research indicates that if humans do not change his ways to adopt a healthy lifestyle and take to outdoor activities like trekking, camping or swimming in future their sensory and information processing capacities would weaken.  

Ecopsychologists advocate that society needs to undergo a paradigm shift from self-centric to ecology-centric, acknowledging the environment — trees, rivers, lakes, forests and mountains — as a broader part of our existence on Earth. Only then will human beings feel the need to protect their environment in the same manner that they protect themselves from any threats to their wellbeing. Thus, this field explores how people can build an emotional bond with nature because when they connect to nature without selfish goals, it brings about experiences of inner harmony, balance, stability and peace. 

(The author is assistant professor, Christ University, Bengaluru)