The talks between Kerala Chief Minister Oommen Chandy and his Karnataka counterpart Siddaramaiah on the issue of easing the ban on night traffic through the Bandipur Tiger Reserve is over. 
ADVERTISEMENTAfter the discussions, Siddaramaiah only said that the “proposals will be examined and discussed with the legal experts and wildlife experts.” Another news report on April 18 said that a night vehicle has caused killing of another animal in Bandipur Reserve.    
Animal rights, like human rights, are universal. Justice Krishna Iyer pleaded for such “animal citizens” on and off the bench. He quoted from a report to the former US president Jimmy Carter: 

“Hundreds of thousands of species – perhaps as many as 20 per cent of all species on earth, will be irretrievably lost as their habitats vanish” (Random Reflections, Universal 2004). 

Ecology is all about citizenship in the planet, where humans are not the all in all. After all, the cause of wildlife protection transcends the state boundaries. 

Karnataka’s conservation strategy is meant for the whole globe of which Kerala is part.  In the CM-level discussions, there were no xenophobic attempts to denigrate each other’s concern.  It was a dialogue, not a dispute. No rhetoric; no populist gestures.

The existing ban on night traffic on National Highways 212 and 67 passing through the Bandipur Tiger Reserve was found to be indispensable to save the wildlife. The 2009 order issued by the Chamarajanagar deputy commissioner (DC), despite its initial cancellation by the state government, could survive, thanks to the Public Interest Litigation filed by L Srinivasa Rao, a lawyer.

The apex court too, in the instant case, had occasion to refer to the precedents on record. The ban on tourists over an area of 5 kilometre radius of the Tribal Reserve in Andaman and Nicobar was upheld by  the Supreme Court in an order dated 2.7.2012 in Bare Foot Inns case. The ban in Bandipur is empirically proved to be successful for it has drastically reduced the road kills.    

Siddaramdiah is right when he indicates that the state on its own cannot decide the matter, for the issue is pending before the apex court. An undue enthusiasm to withdraw the ban had been met with judicial exasperation earlier.

The Nehruvian sympathy to animals took a statutory form when the Prevention of Cruelty Act was passed in 1960. The subsequent Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 is a magnificent piece of legislation, provided there is an alert executive, vigilant bureaucracy and proactive court. 

Meaningful legislations

Sections 35 and 38 of the Act tell about the national parks. Section 36A is on management of conservation reserve. The DC has wide power under the statutes as demonstrated by the then Chamarajanagar DC Manoj Kumar Meena.

We have also the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 with considerable amendments, which has its conceptual foundation in the United Nations convention at Rio de Janeiro (1992). 

The successful practice of these Central legislations is a condition precedent for achieving the object of conservation indicted in the National Forest Policy. 

The Karnataka Forest Act (1963) and Rules (1969) also aim at preservation of natural wealth. The Rules clarify that even the right of way along the forest is not absolute and it cannot go off record.

In Godavarman Thirumulpad case (2012), the Supreme Court issued directives for implementation of a scheme to save Asian wild buffalo (bubalus bubalis) from extinction. The court emphasised the need to take special efforts for saving the “critically endangered species and habitats”.  

The court even took note of the “anthropocentric bias of environmental laws” and directed “eco-centric” solutions.  Ecology is therefore, more than an enlightened selfishness for a better future.

Bandipur, in my view, needs a “Godavarman therapy”. In environment, only extreme postures would lead to even moderate solutions. The minor loss and hardships to human beings (in my home state of Kerala), including the loss of revenue, should give way to a larger cause of conservation.

Terry Tempest Williams, the American author and conservationist, famously said – “To be whole. To be complete.  Wildness reminds us what it means to be human, what we are connected to rather than what we are separate from”. The message is apt enough for Bandipur .  

(The writer is a lawyer in the Supreme Court and the Kerala High Court)