Antony would be given a briefing on the island by the Navy top brass at Karwar on Saturday following which the minister may like to take up the issue with the B S Yeddyruppa government in the future if needed.

Located 19 km from the temple town of Murudeshwara, the coral island remained a bone of contention between the Navy that uses the island for its firing practice and environmental groups, which alleged that the gun firing is detrimental to the island ecology.

On the eve of Antony’s Karwar visit, a Navy officer said the State biodiversity department was “convinced” by the Navy’s arguments and “decided to review the points raised in the protests” received from green groups.

“We carry out the firing on a barren rock of 50 mt x 100 mt dimension with a height of 16 mt. The rock is located one mt away from the notified biodiversity area. No other place in the island is used. The firing practice happens periodically and we have to do it at Netrani because no other place is available,” he told Deccan Herald.

Threat to ecosystem

Environmentalists, on the other hand, said naval exercises are a dire threat to the ecosystem as the bullets, bombs, missiles and torpedoes were fired at the endemic wildlife of the island and the seas causing mass mortality of fish and corals. “Target practice on endangered wildlife is irresponsible because Netrani Island is located under the Coastal Regulatory Zone 4 and fishing zone,” said an environmentalist.

Pakistan’s modernisation

At Karwar, Antony would be briefed on the Project Sea Bird’s strategic importance in the context of Pakistan’s rapid modernisation of the naval forces. The 2,500-km long Pakistani coastline has as many as five naval bases — Karachi, Gwadar, Ormara, Pasni and Jiwani — facing India.

Islamabad is acquiring key naval platforms. It has purchased three new submarines from France and in the process of getting six more from China. Moreover, six frigates and a bunch of P3 Orion naval reconnaissance aircraft from the US is also coming.

Because of the renewed threat perception, completion of the second phase of the Project Sea Bird in time has become critically important.  After the second phase is completed by 2017, Karwar would be able to house 20-25 ships and submarines including aircraft carriers and a similar number of smaller ships.

At an unified commander’s conference here on Friday,  Antony asked the armed forces to keep an eye on the fluid security scenario across the border in the wake of the elimination of Osama bin Laden and be prepared for any eventualities.

“The ripples of this event will have wide ranging impact on our strategic neighbourhood. There are elements in Pakistan’s various structures, which are supporting the terrorists. Safe heaven for terrorists is the main concern for us,” he said.

Antony to commission projects

Defence Minister A K Antony will arrive in Goa on Saturday to commission Goa Shipyard’s infrastructure modernisation projects, DHNS reports from Panaji. A new naval offshore patrol vessel, will also be launched by the minister’s wife Elizabeth.

The first and second phases of the GSL’s infrastructure enhancem-ent have cost Rs 400 crore. The shi-pyard has added a ship lift, repair berths and piers. It beco-mes the first defence shipyard to install the ship lift facility. Antony will lay  foundation stone for a new projects at the yard.
ADVERTISEMENT