Even as much of India is staring at the spectre of drought with the monsoons having played truant, Assam is reeling under floods, its worst in a decade. Almost all the districts in the state are under water. Over a hundred people have lost their lives so far and 20 lakh people have been rendered homeless. Some 2,000 villages are reported to have been wiped out. While flood waters are said to be receding, water in the River Brahmaputra is still hovering around the danger mark. So the worst might not be over as yet. The floods have not spared animal life either. The Kaziranga wildlife sanctuary is said to have lost 538 animals including 13 rhinos. Wildlife authorities should have shifted these animals, especially the rhinos, which are an endangered species, to a safe location.

The government has set up makeshift camps to shelter the displaced. But this, say observers, is far from adequate. The camps can accommodate just a couple of lakhs when many times that number are without a roof over their head. It has been reported too that the camps do not have enough food or medicines. That the government has underestimated the havoc wrought by the floods is evident from prime minister Manmohan Singh’s niggardly response. He has promised Assam a Rs 500-crore relief package, when Assam needs much more. While the government might be preoccupied with rescue operations at the moment, it must simultaneously plan for the coming months when the floods’ economic impact begins to unfold. Crops have been destroyed, pushing to penury many farmers. Hundreds of roads, bridges and rail-tracks have been destroyed impeding the transport of fuel and other commodities that is trucked into the state from the Indian mainland. Does the government have a plan to deal with the multiple problems? 

It was the failure of the government to respond adequately and sensitively to a famine in Mizoram in the 1960s that triggered a powerful insurgency which raged for decades thereafter. The insurgency in Assam is on the decline but a lethargic response from the administration to problems caused by the flood could push unemployed and angry youth back to the path of armed rebellion. The state is at a critical turning point and any misstep by the government could push Assam back to violence. The government must not fail the Assamese people. 
ADVERTISEMENT