Dear Sir,ADVERTISEMENTI am pursuing BCom. I’m willing to do MBA and all my peers are saying that it’s useless and doesn’t lead to employment. Please guide.RohitDear Rohit,It is often felt that doing an MBA immediately after graduation, and without being clear about your domain specialisation, is not fruitful. Firstly, you may not get admission in any top B-school, and secondly, you will be spending two more years in the protected college environment without getting hands-on experience of how organisations work or what the role of managers are.To get a managerial job, you need to convince your employer that you can deliver
results, and that happens only if you have initially worked for some time, evaluated different fields of commerce, and then taken a calculated decision to enhance your skills and qualification in that field.So, it may be wise if you could tentatively decide what area you would like to work in. For instance, you could consider working in fields like banking, insurance, merchant banking, and business analytics among others.Take up an entry-level job in your chosen field, even if it is low paid and in a small organisation, and evaluate after a year or so how you would like your career to proceed.Dear Sir,I am studying BCom. After completing my BCom, should I take up MBA in Finance or Chartered Accountancy?SantoshDear Santosh,Those who are keen on Chartered Accountancy, enrol for its first level CPT course immediately after joining Class 11 or PUC I, prepare well, and appear for the CPT exam after their Class 12 Board exams. Clearing CPT in the first attempt gives you an indication that you are chartered accountant material and you can take up the next level exams.On the other hand, if you are a people-oriented person and not deep into Accountancy, then you can take up some internships while doing BCom, and evaluate the type of environment and organisations you would like to work in. MBA can be done after you have acquired a few years of experience.Dear Sir,computer animation courses. Is there any government My son completed Class XII Science in 2017. He is not very good in Maths. He is interested inrecognised degree courses available in computer animation? Which engineering course can help him pursue a career in the field of computer animation? Please guide.RatnaDear Ratna,Since he is not good in Maths and is not scoring high marks, you may need to re-think about putting him through eight semesters of engineering, as it will involve him doing a great deal of mathematical calculations. Animation does not require much of Mathematics, but do ensure that he not only has an interest but also the creative talent to do well in design field.Once you get expert advice that he has the necessary talent, you can consider putting him into a Bachelor of Design (BDes or BVA) course, and most of them are recognised degree courses. The only factor is that most of the reputed institutions have already closed applications for 2018 intake.However, some of the established institutions include IIT Bombay, NID Gujarat, MICA in Kerala, Srishti Institute of Art, Design and Technology, CMR University, Manipal University and Christ in Bengaluru; Symbiosis International University and DSK International Campus (DSKIC) in Pune.Dear Sir,I am a 22-year-old engineering graduate. I am interested in studying counselling. Though I tried researching online, I could not get any information. Can you please provide some information?A StudentDear Student,Most established institutions offering MSc in Psychological Counselling insist on a degree in social sciences. You can opt for a distance learning MA or MSc programme through open universities such as Indira Gandhi National Open University, Madras University and Annamalai University. Montfort College in Bengaluru allows graduates of any stream to study MSc Psychology through Martin Luther King University.Alternatively, you may take up a part-time counselling certification course in your city to first get a practical ‘feel’ of the field, and then decide your future plans. In Bengaluru, such courses are offered by Prasanna Centre, Parivarthan, etc.Dear Sir,I am an MCA student. My interest is to become a lecturer for either BCA or PUC students. Is BEd compulsory for teaching these courses? If yes, then what are the other possibilities to go for teaching without doing BEd?ChandrikaDear Chandrika,BEd is mostly a requirement to teach high school students. Some schools do make exceptions for Computer Science teachers who have an MCA. So, you can apply and find out. If you wish to teach at the college level, it is not required. Clearing the NET exam will get you employment in reputed colleges and universities.Dear Sir,I am studying in Class 10 and I am good at Maths, Physics and Chemistry. Please guide to choose my career.RaviDear Ravi,Career selection should be done not just be based on the subjects you are good at, but by first fixing long-term goals since you are going to work at least 50 years in your chosen profession. Then, you need to work backward to decide what optional subjects to take, and which degrees and courses will get you into that field.It should be done on the basis of a combination of: interest, subjects you are good at, personality traits, multiple intelligences, social and commercial skills, concentration and memory, lifestyle preferences, and potential to develop skills.If you are unable to do the above exploration by yourself, consult elders who are knowledgeable and can guide you properly. If even that is not available to you, then you can go for an aptitude test and assessment process with a professional in your city.  Dear Sir,I am a PUC II student. I am interested in pursuing Mechanical engineering. Please suggest a branch that would be suitable for me and the best college for MEng.ChandanDear Chandan,Mechanical engineering itself is a branch of engineering. You may opt for it, and do further specialisation at the postgraduate level in areas such as production, robotics, automation, automobiles, mechatronics etc.The college you will get admission in (for Karnataka) will depend on your CET and COMED-K rank. So, start preparing well for both these exams and also for separate entrance exams held by some universities.Dear Sir,I have just completed Class 12 with History, Economics, Sociology and Psychology as my electives. I am planning to take an integrated Law course next year but I haven’t prepared for it yet. Can I skip CLAT and still get a seat in a good college or should I start training for CLAT? Also, can you guide me with the CLAT registration process?AishaDear Aisha,CLAT is the entrance exam for the National Law Schools and some other reputed institutions. Details of registration process are given in www.clat.ac.in. There is another exam LSAT for another 80 reputed law colleges (www.pearsonvueindia.com/lsatindia). Many other law colleges have their own admission process, primarily based on your marks in 12th and interview. Admissions in these colleges are open now so you will not miss an academic year. Not much preparation is needed.Dear Sir,I am a PUC II student with Physics, Chemistry, Maths and Biology as my subjects. I am interested in pursuing Biology, in particular something related to Zoology. Could you let me know about the other options that I can take up for further studies?ShubhangiDear Shubhangi,Zoology offers many challenging careers. You can appear for the Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana KVPY exam which is held in November every year, and it will get you admission in one of the IISERs, in IISc and other such reputed institutions.  If you do not qualify in KVPY you can take up a BSc in Zoology with allied subjects in a good college, and start preparing in your final year of degree to get into postgraduate courses either abroad or in India, in institutions such as Wildlife Institute, Forest Research Institute, National Centre for Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, National Institute of Advanced Studies, etc.