A walk in the forest

The Karnataka Rajya Vignana Parishat recently conducted a two-day environment workshop for 50 students and 12 teachers at Karadi Gudda in Haveri district. The workshop was conducted at the District Training Centre opposite Karadi Gudda, which lies between Haveri and Karjagi. Senior environment expert Harish Bhat, and scientists Karthik Kumar and H M Tatagar, participated in the workshop and explained the importance of biodiversity.ADVERTISEMENT The children also trekked through the forests of Karadi Gudda. Also, they were shown the nursery in the forest, which is home to many medicinal plants. The trek through the forest also provided a great opportunity for children to discuss issues related to wildlife and the environment. Among the topics covered was the snake varieties present in the forests, including kraits, Russel vipers, etc. The children were all ears when they were told how not all kinds of snakes were poisonous, but only some of them. Also, light was thrown on issues of animal-human conflict; about how most wildlife don’t harm people unless provoked. 

Elephant dung found in the forest kickstarted a discussion on how dung could indicate the age of a specific elephant. Animated children gathered around the experts to learn more on the subject.

Also, the students managed to identify at least 300 to 400 species of flora and fauna as part of the camp. Prizes were also given away to students who won the quiz on biodiversity organised in the forest. Legislator Nehru Olekara, Deputy Commissioner H G Srivara also attended the camp.

R S Patil

Save heritage sites

The World Heritage Centre at Hampi is under threat from man and the elements. Blessed with ample supply of stones, the Vijayanagar kings excelled in building monuments that are a pride of India. Now Hampi is a World Heritage Centre that is waiting patiently to be conserved for posterity. We will have to strive harder to protect these monuments and see that at least some of them are restored to their original glory. If India could contribute financially and technically towards restoration of the ancient Hindu temples in Cambodia and Sri Lanka then surely we could allocate resources and technical support towards the conservation of Hampi monuments some of which are in bad shape. These need special and urgent attention. Structures in Vitthala temple complex have to be re-built to fill the voids and the gopuras of brick and mud are deteriorating fast. Grime has covered the roof paintings in the Ranga Mandir hall opposite the sanctum in the Virupaksha temple that need careful cleaning. A good example is the restoration of the pushkarni (tank) by the ASI.