What’s China’s stand?

With global climate talks under way, China issued the most comprehensive document yet on its plans and negotiating positions on emissions. Although much of the information has been released before, it is the first time the data has been presented comprehensively. ADVERTISEMENTChina, the world’s largest contributor to carbon emissions, highlighted its success in reducing emissions per unit of gross domestic product, an indicator that its industries are becoming more energy efficient. The country’s overall carbon emissions have been rising, however, with the growth of its industries. The report also gives a rare nod to nongovernmental organisations, which usually are frowned upon by China’s authorities. 

The report mentions favourably ‘Earth Hour,’ a project by the World Wildlife Fund, and praises the work of another private organisation, the Energy Foundation. The report also indicates that China will follow its previous position of pressuring developing countries to do more.

Speaking as the white paper was released, officials asserted that China and other developing countries had taken serious steps to curb emissions while developed countries lagged. “We hope nations of the world translate their political willingness into concrete actions,” Xie Zhenhua, the head of the Chinese delegation at the Durban meeting, said at the news conference. The report said China achieved a 20 percent reduction in carbon emissions between 2005 and 2010 per unit of gross domestic product and planned to cut another 17 percent by 2015.New York Times News Service 

Birth of a new  iceberg

A rift has formed in the shelf of floating ice in front of the Pine Island Glacier. The surface crack in the glacier runs for almost 30 kilometers, is 60 meters deep and is growing every day. NASA researchers expect the eventual iceberg to cover about 880 square kilometers – an area the size of Berlin. It should break away toward the end of the year or early in 2012. Pine Island Glacier is one of the largest and fastest-moving tongues of ice on the White Continent and drains something like 10 percent of all the ice flowing out of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet into the ocean. In recent years, satellite and airborne measurements have recorded a marked thinning of the PIG, which may be related to climate changes.

But the team working on NASA’s IceBridge project says this latest birthing of a giant iceberg is part of a natural cycle seen every 10 years or so on the glacier. “The last big calving event occurred in 2001, so in general, people have been expecting something like this to happen fairly soon. For us it is very exciting to see this while it is happening,” said Michael Studinger, an IceBridge project scientist.

An iceberg of the size expected will need to be monitored carefully, and not just because it could eventually become a hazard to shipping. 

The biggest icebergs can have a major effect on their surroundings. As they crumble and melt, they dump millions of tons of freshwater into the local marine environment. Dust and rock fragments picked up on land act as nutrients when they fall into the ocean, fueling life such as algae and diatoms right at the bottom of food webs. But these huge, tabular blocks can also put obstacles in the way of animals trying to get to familiar feeding grounds.

“Eventually, the iceberg will move farther north; it will be picked up by wind and ocean currents, and the primary ocean current there is the Antarctic Circumpolar Current. We will certainly be following it,” Studinger said. Jonathon Amos
 New York Times News Service