With the government declaring Bhimgad forest in Khanapur taluk of Belagavi district a wildlife sanctuary in 2011, the problems of villagers living in its ambit have compounded.

ADVERTISEMENTVillagers living in the core area have been put to hardship as the Forest Department is not allowing any development work apart from forest-related activities in the reserve forest. 

While people are willing to relocate, for the past one year the state government is delaying formation of a five-member District Rehabilitation Committee headed by assistant commissioner to determine the rehabilitation package. There has been no response to a letter by the Belagavi deputy conservator of forest (DCF) on rehabilitation, which was forwarded by deputy commissioner to state government in 2015.

Of the 13 villages with a total population of 4,000 that lie in the wildlife sanctuary, eight are in the core forest area. Residents of six of these villages are voluntarily willing to relocate outside the forest area, but within Khanapur taluk, if they are given fair compensation. 

Experts say that as per National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) guidelines, at least Rs 10 crore is required to rehabilitate villagers living in the core area.  

“The state government has already sanctioned the posts for rehabilitation process and only officers need to be appointed. It will be done in a few days," said Belagavi Deputy Commissioner N Jayaram. If the villagers are willing to relocate, the administration will support them by providing compensation as per guidelines, he added. 

Jayaram said that they would first try accommodating the villagers on government lands within Khanapur taluk and go in for land acquisition in case of land shortage. DCF B V Patil said that once the committee is formed and compensation fixed, the government will initiate rehabilitation process in a phased manner.

However, the villagers say that the compensation of Rs 10 lakh per ‘family’, (to be read as all individuals aged above 18 and not dependent on others) as per the NTCA rules, is too less. “We are losing fertile land and ancestral houses. We have been demanding fair compensation, rehabilitation within Khanapur taluk and scientific evaluation of our immovable properties,” said Satheri Parashuram Dabale (71) of Talewadi, one of the core area villages, who is losing 30 acres of wet land.

“It is not the fear of wild animals that is forcing us to leave our village, but lack of facilities,” said Dabale. 

“During every monsoon, Krishnapur, Karnataka’s last village bordering Goa, is cut off from the mainland due to the spate in the rivulet. We have carried pregnant women who had developed labour pain on bikes for nine kilometres on tough terrain,” he added. 

In the last four years, they have hardly received compensation from the government for crop or cattle losses caused by wild animals, he said. “Agriculture alone cannot sustain us. The government has left us with no option but to relocate,” Dabale added.

Belagavi District Wildlife Warden Sachin Patil said, “Relocation is a win-win situation for wildlife conservation and villagers.” 

Bhimgad and surrounding forest is a catchment area, which meets 90% water requirement of the region. Instead of spending crores of rupees on afforestation elsewhere, there is a readymade highly bio-diverse hotspot here. The delay in expediting the relocation process shows the government’s ‘priority’ for environment, he said.