In a classic case of ‘the fence itself eating the crop,’ the guards deployed at Amrit Mahal Basur Kaval area, have been cultivating onion crop illegally. 

ADVERTISEMENTStrangely, it is for the second consecutive year that they have taken to agrarian activity blatantly, though they were caught for the illegal act last year.  According to a press release issued by environment and wildlife conservation activist G Veeresh, “The Department of Animal Husbandry is tasked with the conservation of indigenous Amrit Mahal breed of cattle with a dedicated breeding centre set up at Kaval area. To guard the area, the guards are hired on a contract basis. But the guards, instead of restricting to their job, have indulged in illegal cultivation of commercial crop. 

Though they are allowed to grow ragi, maize and also hay for cattle feed, they have taken to large-scale cultivation of commercial crops.” It is suspected that the higher officials in the department have colluded with the guards in the illegal activity. 

To substantiate this, Veeresh has recalled that when the similar activity came to light during the previous year, the officials seized the crop and also auctioned it. Now, the guards have already harvested the crop, he claimed.

Wildlife sanctuary
The state government has declared Amrit Mahal Basur Kaval Area as a wildlife sanctuary in the year 2002. While the Forest Department was tasked with the protection of the sanctuary, the Department of Animal Husbandry has retained the breeding and the conservation centre under it.

The kaval area also has the credit of being the only forest in open plain coming under Amrit Mahal. It is also a habitat for wild animals like wolves, leopards, black bucks, besides birds and snakes. 

Instead of taking up conservation activities, the Forest Department has been focusing more on civil works like building artificial lakes, watch towers, trenches among other works, Veeresh charged.

The district administration should take a call at the earliest in the interest of saving wildlife from annihilation, he said in the release.
DH News Service