District-in-Charge Minister K Abhayachandra Jain has directed the PWD officials to set up sand depots within three months to check illegal sand mining that is being carried out unabated in the district.

ADVERTISEMENTAll the MLAs raised the issue of illegal sand mining and urged the minister to initiate action to check mining.  

MLC Gayathri Shanthe Gowda said that sand was stored illegally at Markle Crusar. The Raitha Sangha members had urged the officials to seize it. However, the officials had given a report that only 300 loads of sand was found in the vicinity. 

To which, MLA C  T Ravi said that the officials can seize the sand and auction it. Contractors who have obtained permits have stocked sand. A few organisations are hand in glove with the sand mafia, he said. 

The Minister has directed Deputy Commissioner to conduct a detailed probe into the incident and initiate stringent action against culprits. 

Use of machines in Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) was also discussed in length at the meeting. 

MLC Motamma said that there was misappropriation in implementing work under the Act. False documents have been produced to claim the amount. However, no assets have been created using the funds. If JCB is used while implementing the scheme, then it should be seized. 

To which, all the MLAs unanimously supported. 

Mescom flayed

All the MLAs expressed their displeasure over the functioning of the Mescom. Electricity has not been supplied even for drinking water projects. To which, Mescom engineer Vijayakumar has said “power connection will be given to the drinking water projects within 15 days. Karle, Menasinahadya, Bendehaklu villagers will get electricity within three months.” 

When MLA D N Jeevraj raised the issue of poor progress  in the work on Morarji Desai Residential Schools at N R Pura and Sringeri taluk, ZP CEO said that Karnataka Residential Educational Institutions Society is responsible for delay in completing the work. 

The MLA urged the ZP CEO to issue a notice to the Karnataka Residential Educational Institutions Society to complete the work within time frame. 

Tarikere MLA G H Srinivas said that wildlife division is not granting permission for the development of road leading to Kemmannugundi. Permission should be provided for laying a concrete road. 

Wildlife division DFO Krishna Udupudu said as per Wildlife Act, no concrete roads can be laid inside the forest. The work can be initiated only after obtaining permission from Wildlife Board. 

MLA Y S V Datta, B B Ningaiah, ZP president Rekha Huliyappa Gowda, DC V Yashwanth, ZP CEO Shivashankar were present.