Would you fancy a holiday where you would get to wrestle with the locals, make your own rice beer and gorge on food that’s cooked in red chillies?

ADVERTISEMENTIf you’re game, then the North East of India would be the ideal place for you! But if that really doesn’t fire your imagination, be assured that there are enough peaceful cafes, thrilling wildlife parks and plentiful of shopping and romantic getaways to keep you engaged.

And taking you through a virtual trip to the North East, Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh regions of India, Discovery channel’s new series #GoNorthEast has, to put it like a Bollywood formula film, dance, drama, action, romance and adventure!

Anchor Varun Mitra takes you on a road trip weaving through the seven sister-states in the North East. “Nothing can prepare you for any journey,” he says.

“And for a journey to the North East, you don’t have the slightest inkling of what awaits you, unless of course you watch the show! The place is a treasure and you must go like a blank slate,” he exults, fresh from his trip to the region.

Shillong takes the cake as the most ‘touristy’ destination to visit. It has lots of interesting cafes offering a wide variety of food to suit any palate. “Shillong has a very warm and open atmosphere, and a very nice vibe to it. It’s fun and commercial in the most positive sense of the word. It’s a place where any tourist will feel comfortable. You can walk into any of the amazing karaoke bars or go shopping endlessly. It’s a cosy family spot too,” says Varun.

A taste of local life

The show also takes its viewers through some unusual adventures. If you can’t think beyond shawls, dance and songs when it comes to Nagaland, #GoNorthEast changes it all. Varun’s most memorable moment there was the wrestling match with the Nagas, right in the middle of scenic mountains.

“It was slightly crazy, agreed, but the best thing one can ever experience. I think they were a little easy on me,” he confesses, adding that since he was allowed to choose his opponent, he went with the most puny looking guy, and got beaten even then.

If you are the sort who doesn’t mind a fair bit of adventure to spice up your life, then Manipur is strongly recommended. You can put your sword-fighting skills to test with the traditional Manipuri martial art — Thang Ta. Better still, you can dive into the spicier than spicy food.

“I had my most memorable meal here. We had to catch our own fish, by the way, as we travelled to the house we were invited to on Loktak Lake,” he says. You are ferried across in a really long and narrow boat, with barely any elbow space, to a biomass island village housing about seven or eight families. “They use red chillies as a vegetable. We had varieties of fish.”

Tripura is a travel back in time with the Reang way of life. And folks, it also has a lake palace — Neer Mahal, the only one in this region. If you’d like to take a shot at it, try brewing your own rice beer here. Yes, creating your own drink and savouring it can be quite an intriguing experience.

Among the most exciting rituals in the North East is the pre-wedding feast. It’s not so easy on the groom though. Story goes that the to-be-bride’s parents will give away the girl only if the prospective groom can finish every bit of food off the plate they serve, and a fairly large plate it is!

The good thing is that he is allowed to bring along one or two of his best buddies to lop it off. Varun’s crew got a shot at cheering one such groom and, yes, they did attend a wedding at the end of it.

Family lessons

Among the most fascinating experiences is a visit to the Shillong Chamber Choir that stays as one family in a really large house, which includes their recording studio too. Besides, there is a music school attached where future performers are groomed.

“It’s fascinating to see so many people from diverse backgrounds coming together for the love of music. We were very fortunate to get an entire day with them as they recorded ‘Vande Mataram’ for our show,” says Varun.

If high altitudes and solitude is what you crave for, then drive down to Tawang in Arunachal Pradesh. Varun says that the journey through Sela Pass (at an altitude of 13,700 feet above sea level) was his most exciting yet vulnerably tranquil outing.

“I don’t think anyone can ever describe in words what they feel when they are up there. There is a lake at this particular point. There is a solitary shop with an aunty handing out Maggi, water and rum to motorists. It’s out of this world; the whole trip really is,” says Varun, about his journey that’s etched forever in his memory.

#GoNorthEast airs every Saturday at 10 pm on Discovery, all through December and January.