Actor Rana Daggubati took to Twitter on Sunday (March 21) to share the latest promo of his upcoming movie Haathi Mere Saathi much to the delight of his die-hard fans. The short video highlights his character's attempts at saving his friends -- the elephants -- from danger. It is likely to appeal to those who are fond of realistic movies that touch upon sensitive issues.
 ADVERTISEMENTWitness the biggest battle between Bandev and anyone who stands in his way to save the elephants.
Watch this new promo from #HaathiMereSaathi releasing in theatres from 26th March#5DAYSTOGO! pic.twitter.com/Mw2cVJZL0d— Rana Daggubati (@RanaDaggubati) March 21, 2021Haathi Mere Saathi has been directed by Tamil filmmaker Prabhu Solomon and explores the ill effects of human-wildlife conflict. Rana essays the role of a guide named 'Bandev', who shares a special bond with nature. His performance and the grand background score are expected to be highlights of the biggie.Haathi Mere Saathi has a strong cast that includes Zoya Hussain, Pulkit Samrat and Mirzapur actor Shriya Pilgaonkar. It was supposed to hit the screens last April but that did not happen due to the Covid-19 crisis. It is expected to release on March 26.Haathi Mere Saathi has been shot simultaneously in Telugu and Tamil as Aaranya and Kaadan with Vishnu Vishal essaying Pulkit's role from the Hindi version.
 Rana began his Bollywood career with Dum Maaro Dum, which created a buzz among fans. He subsequently acted in films such as Department, Baby and The Ghazi Attack. The Baahubali films, featuring him as the antagonist opposite Prabhas, did pretty well in the Hindi belt and emerged as pan-India blockbusters.
 It remains to be seen whether Haathi Mere Saathi helps him consolidate his standing in the industry.
 Rana will next be seen in the Telugu movie Virata Parvam, co-starring Sai Pallavi. He is also working on the Tollywood adaption of the Malayalam movie Ayyappanum Koshiyum, which starred Prithviraj in the lead. He recently revealed that he would be more than happy to reunite with Prabhas if a Baahubali-like script comes his way again. He was to be a part of the Hindi movie Bhuj but opted out due to health issues.