The Forest department is gearing up to tackle the water crisis in the tiger reserves of Bandipur and Nagarahole, as waterholes in and around the forests have gone dry. 

ADVERTISEMENTSaid to be a first-of-its-kind initiative in South India, the department has begun filling up lakes in the forests, with water supplied through tankers, to quench the thirst of the animals during the summer ahead. 

A pilot project has already begun at the Nagarahole tiger reserve, while it will be taken up soon in the Bandipur tiger reserve.

Post the severe drought of 2012, there has been a severe water shortage in the tiger reserves. The Forest department has even formed an expert committee to visit the protected areas (PAs) of Bandipur, Nagarahole and other reserves to take stock of the situation. 

“A team of experts headed by the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (PCCF) and Chief Wildlife Warden will study the situation in all the PAs and then decide how to tackle it,” said Ajay Mishra, Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (APCCF) and Director, Project Elephant.

PCCF (Wildlife) Dipak Sarmah told Deccan Herald that the experts would begin their visit to the PAs on February 6. 

“The  team comprises the APCCF, Project Tiger and other officers, besides experts like A J T John Singh. They will gather information from the officials at the PAs,” he said.

“It has already started at some places at Nagarahole. That will take care of the small herbivores. But, since there was very less rainfall this year, we need to think about the requirement of bigger mammals like elephants also,” he said. 

Details like the number of lakes and waterholes and those that have dried up will be obtained by the expert committee.

“Water from Lakshmanateertha river is being brought in a tanker to fill up one of the lakes at Veeranahosahalli. An artificial tank has been constructed at Metikuppe, which is being filled up using water from a lake outside the park. This has helped in preventing the jumbos from straying out. Both these projects are taken up on a pilot basis,” R Gokul, Deputy Conservator of Forests, Nagarahole, told Deccan Herald.

He said he had rejected the offer of help by many donors and wildlife enthusiasts to supply water,  “It is not necessary for Nagarahole, where there are many rivers and most of the park adjoins Kodagu district, except Metikuppe and Veeranahosahalli. 
Lakshmanateertha river flows inside the park. The Nagarahole river too passes through the park. The Taraka dam and Kabini dam are also near to it,” he said. 

However, the situation is not so easy in Bandipur. With almost all the water bodies inside the park having dried up, the park faces an acute shortage of water. Sources said the department had already begun efforts to fill up the water holes. 

“In the first phase, waterholes in the safari will be filled up, followed by the water bodies beyond the tourist zone,” sources said. However, with no rivers in the vicinity, it will not be an easy solution, say experts. 

“There are not many water bodies or rivers here (Bandipur). If they plan to bring water from Kabini it will be expensive, while bringing water from the Moyar river is not possible,” said sources. 

The DCF, Bandipur, was not available for comment.