In a November 16, 2009 notification, the Government upgraded the Director’s post to Conservator and appointed Mahesh Shiroor (presently serving as Conservator of Forest, Sagar division). Vijay Ranjan Singh was appointed the Deputy Conservator of Forest, Nagarahole division and continues to hold the additional charge of the Chamarajendra Zoological Gardens.

With DCF Vijay Ranjan Singh engaging himself with the wildlife division and busy with his duty in forest since the first week of his transfer, he has been able to devote very little time for the Zoo. 

Even as the daily activity of the Zoo and administrative issues take a backseat without a full time executive, projects like animal exchange programme and others have also received a setback. 

“Though the absence of a full time Director has not had a big impact, the presence of Executive Head brings a difference. Any quick and immediate decisions is not possible without a full time Director. The Zoo ought to have a one soon,” a senior official with the Zoo told Deccan Herald. 

On many occasions, the staff of the Zoo had to call for the services of DCF  Singh, who had a satisfying stint as Director for urgent issues and clearance of files. 

The Zoo has many animal exchange proposals under pipeline with the Singapore Zoo, Leipzig Zoo of Germany, Zoo Zlin of Czech Republic and Junagadh Zoo in Gujarat for import of some of exotic species of animals and birds in exchange of the animals from the Mysore zoo. 

Though, a few programmes has been approved by the Central Zoo Authority (CZA) it requires a high degree of rapport and interaction skills to pursuade the Director General of Foreign Trade and even sometimes the CZA and the heads of the foreign zoo’s to make the project a success. 

Chairman of Karnataka Zoo Authority Nanjundaswamy said that he has also pushed for a early full time Director in the Zoo. 

“I wrote to Meira Saxena, principal secretary of the Forest department and to senior officer B K Singh to fill the post at the earliest. However, the absence of Director has had a little impact because of presence of the KZA Head office within Zoo premises,” he told this paper. 

Not relieved

When contacted, Mahesh Shiroor, who is appointed the Executive Director of the Zoo said that he was not relieved from the Sagar posting so far. 

“The region is the Chief Minister’s constituency and I cannot leave it abruptly without handing over charge to my successor. I will take the charge as soon as I am relieved from this post,” he told Deccan Herald.ADVERTISEMENT