Greenpeace India today decided to file an appeal against the order cancelling its registration as a society, terming it as "unjustified" and alleged that the repeated attempts to "muzzle" its voice show government's "unwillingness" to engage in a healthy democratic dialogue.

ADVERTISEMENTClaiming that the ecological and human rights situation in India is "steadily worsening", the NGO's Executive Board in a detailed statement attacked the government and charged that the order contains "inaccurate and baseless" allegations.

It said in the current climate, where a "singular and flawed" vision of development is being pushed, Greenpeace has an urgent need to continue its campaigningand the green NGO "cannot and will not" be silenced this way.

Noting that it has resolved to resist attempts to shut it down, it said, "You can't sink a rainbow! You can't muzzle dissent in a democracy."

On November 6, the NGO claimed it received notice from the Registrar of Societies (RoS), summarily announcing cancellation of its registration as a society and its board was "directed to pass a special resolution and dissolve itself" within one month of the order.

"We believe this order is completely unjustified, especially, as we have complied with the law to the fullest. After a detailed review, we are convinced that the order contains several inaccurate and baseless allegations...For over a year now, the courts have upheld our right to exist despite attempts by a variety of government authorities seeking to silence our voice," it said.

"In all cases, we have had favourable verdicts upholding our freedom of speech and right to dissent. We have therefore agreed unanimously to direct the organisation to take all necessary steps to appeal this order," the Board comprising of seven members said in a statement.

The NGO claimed it has been accused of not submitting a detailed response to their earlier notice (the show cause notice dated June 16).

However it claimed that it had copies of receipts stamped in acknowledgement of its response dated October 5.

"We are determined to continue our campaigns - for clean air, safe food and clean energy. These repeated attempts to muzzle Greenpeace only show the government's unwillingness to engage in a healthy democratic dialogue. We remain committed to upholding our right to dissent," it said. 

Among those who signed the statement today are Board Chair Ashish Kothari, G Gautama, Director of Palar Centre for Learning (KFI), Biswajit Mohanty, former member of National Board for Wildlife, Tara Murali, trustee, Citizen Consumer and Civic Action Group, Chennai, senior journalist Paranjoy Guha Thakurta and author Harish Hande - CEO of SELCO Foundation.

The NGO said it has had the most serious threat yet to its continued existence in India. It said it is happy to have contributed "viable alternative" solutions, especially those benefitting the poor, such the solar micro grid powering Dharnai, a village in Bihar.

The Union home ministry had recently told Delhi high court that it cancelled the foreign contribution registration of the NGO as it was continuing to use its Foreign Contribution Registration Act (FCRA) accounts despite the suspension of the same.