The Women and Child Development Department has decided to make anganwadi centres in Dakshina Kannada attractive and child-friendly through the use of paintings, alphabets and numbers on the walls.

At a time when the enrolment at anganwadi centres is dwindling, the department has taken a step towards making anganwadi centres an attractive place of learning. The plain and dull walls of 418 anganwadi centres will be adorned with beautiful pictorial arts within a short span of time.

Speaking to DH, Women and Child Development Department Deputy Director Sundar Poojary said that the move aims at making the centres more attractive.  The state government has released Rs 41.80 lakh under the Bala Snehi programme for the upliftment of anganwadi centres in the district. Chief Minister Siddaramaiah, in his budget speech 2016-17 had announced the ‘Bala Snehi Programme’. He has also announced to make 10,000 anganwadi centres child-friendly with wall paintings relating to pre-school education in order to attract children to anganwadi centres. A sum of Rs 10 crore was earmarked for the purpose. 

Under the new programme, selected anganwadi centres are to be given a facelift at a cost of Rs 10,000 each. Accordingly, 88 anganwadi centres in Puttur, 67 in Bantwal, 40 in Vittal, 67 in Belthangady, 40 in Sullia, 94 in Mangaluru Rural and 17 in Mangaluru Urban will be given a facelift. The work on the paintings on the walls of the centres have already started. The local artists have been entrusted the responsibility of painting the walls of the centres,” the deputy director said. 

The primary objective of upgrading the anganwadi centres is to ensure that parents prefer enrolling their children in the anganwadis. Earlier, anganwadis played a major role in the development of a child. The paintings will also provide space for their creative growth as well. 

The walls of the centres will be adorned with paintings of birds, animals, flowers, fruits and vegetables, cartoon characters. A painting of wildlife elephants, deer, tigers and lions, all in one painting is the main attraction. The concept also provides a platform for local artists to showcase their talent. Anganwadi centres which are in good condition have been selected under the first phase of the project, the official said. 

Kannada and English alphabets have also found place with numericals. This apart, the information on prevention of child marriages, services provided, pre-schooling education, health issues, timely health check up and nutritious food, phone number of the helpline among others will be posted on the walls.