Indian travellers have been bitten by the adventure tourism bug. Armed with a yen for thrill, they travel the world looking for that adrenaline rush. 

ADVERTISEMENTEncashing on this growing interest in adventure tourism, many countries have started aggressively marketing their outdoor activities and destinations to potential Indian adventure buffs. Susheela Nair offers the lowdown on this thrilling trend 

Come monsoon and the great outdoors in Wayanad beckon tourists to experience the thrills and spills of mud football, off-road rallying, bamboo rafting, archery, mountain biking, commando walking, crab catching and more, all in the rain during the annual Splash festival. Exciting sports is now on offer for everyone, all around the year. Adventure sports have come a long way from traditional activities like camping, trekking and mountaineering. Watching exciting sports on the TV screen has eroded the dormant fear and fuelled the interest of thrill-seeking travellers. 

When the Star TV generation started scouting for fun, discovery and adventure in their travels, the Indian adventure boom gathered steam. They snapped up high adrenaline activities like windsurfing in Manapad, paragliding in Billing, rock climbing in Hampi, white water rafting in Zanskar, heli-skiing in Manali, scuba diving in the Andamans and aqua parasailing in Goa.

Daring dudes like Kothiraj, Karnataka’s Spiderman, have kindled the fire of adventure in Indian travellers with his breathtaking antics while scaling the Chitradurga Fort. 

Outdoor activities are no longer a daunting feat, even for those confined to wheelchairs. All you need is a yen for thrill, some physical stamina, and a really cool head. People’s Action Group for Inclusion and Rights (PAGIR), in close association with Travel Another India, a company that organises off-the-beaten-path responsible travel, has devised a wheelchair-friendly circuit in Ladakh.

The trend is to go off the beaten track, set foot in places usually inhabited by explorers, adventurers and other exotic species. The race is on to get there before they are taken over by the teeming masses. Brave and hardy souls like Priya Venkatesh have made a dash to Antarctica, an environmentally-disturbed destination, to protect nature and endangered animal species. While on a recent expedition to Antarctica on Climate Change and Sustainability at the 2041 International Antarctic Expedition, she took the Polar Plunge (that is just above freezing in the Antarctic) as part of the race to save Antarctica, championed by the organisation 2041.

Encashing on the growing Indian interest for adventure tourism, many countries have started aggressively marketing their outdoor activities and destinations to potential Indian adventure buffs. While Indian travellers have been bitten by the adventure tourism bug, Australia and South Africa top the list of adventure destinations. Currently Philippines, Oman, Turkey, Spain and Switzerland have emerged as the new favourites of Indian adventure travellers. 

Australia’s dramatic outback, wilderness areas, mountain ranges and waterways make it a unique destination with an exciting edge. Sydney, Melbourne, Gold Coast and areas around the Great Barrier Reef are well known for high octane activities and events. “While surfing is a popular sport, few are aware that skiing can also be done in the Snowy Mountains in New South Wales and Mount Buller, close to Melbourne, during the Australian winter. Besides several scenic hiking and biking options, you can snorkel and scuba dive around the Great Barrier Reef,” says Nishant Kashikar, country manager India, Tourism Australia. At Phillip Island, one can experience an adrenaline spin around the Grand Prix Circuit in a high performance rally car. Harley Davidson rides in Melbourne and on the Great Ocean Road are a big hit with Indian travellers.

“Besides parasailing, hang gliding and skydiving in Wollongong near Sydney, adventure activities such as hot air ballooning, jet boating and bungee jumping are on offer in most of the Australian cities. And you don’t need to visit a zoo to get up close and personal with extraordinary wildlife in every corner of the country: kangaroos on Kangaroo Island, devils in Tasmania and koalas all through the outback,” added Kashikar.

Thrills & spills

South Africa’s diverse terrain, together with an ideal climate for outdoor activities, makes it a rich hunting ground for adrenaline seekers and adventure sport lovers. Explaining the activities on offer in South Africa, Hanneli Slabber, country head, South African Tourism, says, “With a spurt in the uptake of adventure activities amongst Indian travellers, we will continue to invest in highlighting our adventure offerings in India. As far as the adrenaline rush goes, one cannot ask for anything better than jumping off the Bloukrans Bridge, the highest commercial bridge bungee jump in the world. Abseiling and kloofing (or canyoning) are the other sizzling favourites. Apart from experiencing new levels of excitement, you can also be privy to some incredible scenery whilst you’re exploring these mountain rivers.” Popular spots for experiencing abseiling and kloofing in South Africa include Cape Town, down the iconic Table Mountain, Garden Route and Port Elizabeth.

“Helicopter flips in Cape Town offer the joys of a bird’s eye view of the entire scenic countryside in a single trip before choosing your drive-to destination; or swoop low over the ocean on a coastal flip and watch the dolphins at play in the breakers below. There are exhilarating quad biking trails from coast to countryside, through valleys, indigenous forests, over scenic mountains, to witness the amazing wildlife. 

There are trails that twist and wind through sand and bush and travel up steep climbs,” explained Slabber. For a marine adrenaline rush, thrill seekers can indulge in shark cage diving in False Bay, Mossel Bay and Gansbaai, and come nose to snout with the Great White Sharks in their natural environment, or try the unique crocodile cage-diving in bite-proof cages in Oudtshoorn for the ultimate up close and personal encounter with four-metre-long Nile crocodiles.

If you’re into paragliding, hang gliding, or sky diving, South Africa has a real treat in store for you. Hot air ballooning in South Africa is arguably the best way to take in the landscapes of this beautiful country. The Bill Harrop’s Balloon Safari will hover gently above the tree tops of the beautiful Magalies River Valley and drift majestically high above the Magaliesberg range in the Cradle of Humankind World Heritage Site. Safaris, centered around spotting the ‘big 5’ — the lion, elephant, buffalo, rhinoceros and leopard — are a must for anyone interested in wildlife.

Desert sport

Not many tourists are aware that unlike any of its Middle Eastern neighbours, Oman is a treasure trove of outdoor adventure up for grabs. Its vast expanse of deserts, beaches, mountains and wadis are an adventure-seeker’s ‘dream’ destination. It offers a plethora of desert activities like sand dune bashing with 4WDs and ATV bikes, skiing on the sand, along with camping under the star-spangled desert sky. There is no greater experience than pitching your tent among the sprawling, honey-coloured dunes, with the wind changing the landscape around you before your eyes at the Wahiba Sands. With its 1,700 kilometres of coastline and beaches, Oman offers some of the region’s finest spots for diving, snorkelling, kayaking and boating on the crystal blue waters off the coast at the Marina Bandar Al-Rowdha.

 An extensive network of hiking trails exists across the country, particularly in the Western Hajar, with reasonably well-marked trails winding around and through some of Oman’s most spectacular mountain ridges, wadis and canyons. Jebel Shams (mountain of the Sun), the tallest peak in Oman, has walks, scenic views, abandoned villages and a cool climate with numerous spectacular viewpoints. It is also home to Wadi Nakhr Gorge canyon, one of Oman’s greatest natural wonders. Inside the canyon, you can haggle with the local rug weavers, trek to the cliff dwellings along the canyon rim, and visit the remains of towns once occupied, ages ago, by Persian settlers. Rock climbers can test their mettle on the stony crags of Jebel Misht while antiquarians will want to visit the mysterious Beehive Tombs of Bat. A cave excursion to Majlis Al Jinn, the second largest underground cave in the world, is equally interesting. Take a ride in the passenger train from the visitor centre to the mouth of the caves. Spend a few hours at the Al Hoota Cave in the Al Hamra district at the foot of Jabal Shams and see the wide variety of natural formations and subterranean life, stalagmites and stalactites.

Philippines prides itself as a multi-faceted adventure destination which is beyond the usual. It has a complete line-up of adventure activities that range from tropical mountaineering, canopy walking, caving, whitewater rafting, and surfing. Exploring sunken World War II ships at Coron Island in northern Palawan, marvelling at the mysteries of this planet’s underwater kingdom, hovering above glistening corals and reefs and swimming along amazing underwater fishes at the Tubbataha Natural Marine Park at Palawan are high on the list of adventure junkies. Birdwatchers can have the experience of their lifetime in the wild, and see up close the remarkable eagle that is known to glide through thick, canopied forests, grab monkeys, snakes and even small deer at the Philippines Eagle Centre. Take a tour of the Puerto Princesa Underground River at Palawan — a UNESCO World Heritage Site and the longest navigable underground river on earth.

With such a long coastline along the sea, water sports are available in just about every beach resort in Turkey. During the warmer months, underwater diving is a popular sport where you can see underwater caverns and sunken ships. “With over 8,333 km of coastline spanning the azure waters of the Mediterranean, the Aegean, the Black Sea and the Sea of Marmara, Turkey has a multitude of coves, inlets, bays and beaches at which yachtsmen can choose a different and private anchorage each night. You can embark on the Blue Voyage, sail with the winds, into coves and over the seas, and to the private beach of Cleopatra, the eternal fires of the remains of ancient civilisations. Turkey has approximately 40,000 caves and caverns to explore — from the Caverns of Antayla to the Caves of Zongulduk,” says Ozgur Ayturk, culture & tourism counsellor, Turkish Embassy, Delhi.

When in Europe

When it comes to winter sports, Switzerland is known for decades as one of the world’s top winter sports hotspot. While Switzerland offers tobogganing, snow-tubing, skijoring, ice-diving, caving, snowshoe trekking besides skiing, France Tourism is encashing on the tagline, ‘Be There! Do That!’ to lure tourists to experience the frenzy of white water rafting in vibrant Chamonix. The best way to discover the Cap de Creus Nature Reserve in Spain is by enjoying a range of sports activities. A good way to see the forests and meadows further inland is to don your walking boots and set off on one of the hiking routes. 

And sailing is the ideal way to explore the rocky coastline, bays and cliffs. For a marine adrenaline rush, head to the beaches of Les Carboneres, Playa de Santa Creu, Cala Font Morisca, Playa Sant Antony and Cau del Llop — all of which are ideal for snorkelling, scuba diving and fishing.

For travellers who desire a unique adventurous experience, Royal Caribbean Cruises offers an exciting array of on-board activities, shore excursions and cruise tours. Exclusive on-board experiences include the FlowRider surf simulator and Zip Line. Partake in first at-sea innovations like a rock climbing wall 40 feet above the deck, an ice skating rink, miniature golf course, full-sized sports courts and lots more. For the real adventurous spirit, each cruise line offers various off-beat itineraries that stretch your imagination. These cruises sail to various adventurous destinations such as the rugged coasts of Canada, the interiors of Alaska, Europe, South America and the wonderful Galapagos Islands.

 A system for emergency relief and rescue is woefully lacking in India. Explaining the hazards faced by adventure tour operators, Madhusudhan, CEO, Woody Adventures, says, “Sometimes, thrill vacations can go awry when we have to face natural calamities and altitude with minimal help from the outside world. Getting a permit to own or use a satellite phone is a cumbersome procedure. Without them, rescue operations are impossible because we lead groups to remote areas where cell phones have no access. Another issue is insurance. While some private firms provide cover for tourists, there are many conditions to adhere to.”

 A survey conducted by the online travel portal, Trip Advisor, revealed that the perception of Indian adventure instructors/operators is abysmal among travellers when it comes to high-risk activities. This was attributed to poor quality and maintenance of equipment, and overall low standards of safety. Anur Reddy, MD, Jungle Lodges & Resorts, says, “We follow international standards of safety guidelines in all our resorts offering high-risk adventure activities.” 

Vinay Sirsi, director, Ozone Experiential Learning Technologies, lamented that currently there is no body in India acting as a benchmark for operators and regulators across the outdoor industry regarding safety guidelines customised for specific activities, emergency procedures, equipment, and a commitment to environmentally sustainable practices. “It is imperative to have a single window nodal agency for managing adventure activity administration, accreditation or licensing and create a sustainable risk management plan for adventure activities across the destinations,” says Sirsi. 

It is high time tourism departments verified the skill and competency of Indian adventure operators and also ensured that they strictly adhered to environmentally sustainable practices. The need of the hour is a strict accreditation policy for the safety of tourists.

Feedback

We’d like to hear from you. 
Do mail us at: sundaydh@gmail.com