Of the numerous homestays in the coffee land, only 215 homestays are registered in Chikkamagaluru.ADVERTISEMENTThe tourism department had asked the homestay owners to register online by August 2. As per the statistics available, as many as 438 applications have been submitted online. In fact, a team of wildlife activists had conducted a survey on the homestays in the district. As per the survey, there were more than 500 homestays in the district.A number of unauthorised homestays are operating in the district.Bhadra Wildlife Conservation Society managing trustee D V Girish, wildlife activist G Veeresh and other environmentalists have urged the district administration to check unauthorised homestays in the district. “As many as 215 homestays have availed permission from the Department of Tourism so far. Applications have been submitted by many others for registration of homestays. Majority of the processing has already been completed online. A few have however shown a lethargic attitude towards registration of homestays. We do not have much power when it comes to inspection and vigil of homestays,” said an official from the tourism department. A homestay should have a minimum of five rooms. Each room should accommodate 2+1 visitors. The owner or family members of the homestay should mandatorily reside in the homestay. The entrance of the homestay should have a name board with the logo of the tourism department and mention that the homestay is registered with the tourism department of Karnataka. Unfortunately, a few of the homestays are not adhering to the guidelines of the department, alleged environmentalists.“Homestays are a boon for the coffee growers. The association will not support unauthorised homestays in the district. Officials should initiate strict action against unauthorised homestays in the district,” said Chikkamagaluru Homestay Owners Association president Utham Gowda Hulikere. Wildlife Conservation Society activist G Veeresh has urged the district administration to tighten the policy on homestays. Strict action should be initiated against those who failed to adhere to the guidelines, he demanded.