The Karnataka government on Saturday urged Railway Minister Suresh Prabhu to introduce trains with Spanish-made Talgo coaches in the state. 

ADVERTISEMENTIndustries Minister R V Deshpande, who met Prabhu in the city, reiterated the demand for the lightweight aluminium ‘tilting’ coaches, to facilitate the introduction of semi-high speed trains between Bengaluru and Mysuru. 

Vandita Sharma, additional chief secretary, Infrastructure Development department, said, “The minister has assured us that he will consider our proposal seriously. The Railways will, however, have to first conduct trials of such trains on this curvaceous route to ascertain if it is even a viable option,” she said. 

Deshpande said that after the high-speed rail project was junked, Karnataka was exploring the commissioning of semi-high speed trains on this route. Travel time on this train, which runs at a speed of 135 km, will be 1 hour 10 minutes, he said.

The minister said that the doubling of the Ramanagaram-Mysuru line and laying of the Bengaluru-Hassan line would be completed by December this year. 

The Bidar-Kalaburagi new line too would be completed by early next year. Once all these three lines are commissioned, Karnataka will add 238 km to its track length.

Referring to the controversial Hubballi-Ankola rail line cutting through the Western Ghats, Deshpande said now that the National Green Tribunal had disposed of the case, the department was readying to submit a fresh proposal to the Ministry of Forests and Environment (MoEF) in the next 15 to 20 days. 

The minister said that the South Western Railway had re-examined the project area required and had reduced the forest area requirement from 667 hectares to 602 hectares. The length of tunnels and viaducts had been increased to protect the forests and wildlife. 

“Once the MoEF gives its approval, the government will have to pledge 1,500 hectares from its land bank for afforestation,” he said and added that the current project cost stood at Rs 3,500 crore.

He said that the people of Tadadi in Uttar Kannada district had given their consent for the development of the Tadadi port. 

“Two public hearings were conducted and the people have welcomed the project. Once the environmental clearance is obtained, Request for Quotation will be invited,” the minister said. 

Both these projects were vital for the economic development and progress of the north Karnataka region, he said.

Speaking at a programme to inaugurate electrification of the Yelahanka-Dharmavaram section, doubling with electrification of the Yelahanka-Channasandra and the Yeshwantpur-Yelahanka sections in the city, the railway minister hinted at introducing trains with Talgo coaches between Bengaluru and Mysuru, but did not specify when the trial run will take place. 

Referring to the demand for suburban trains in the city, Prabhu invited Deshpande for a meeting on the issue. Prabhu said a new rail coach factory will be inaugurated in three months in Yadgir. Spread on 150 acres of land, the factory is located between Saidapur and Chegunta railway stations. 

The project was sanctioned when Mallikarjun Kharge was the Railway Minister.