Shrinking green cover, unabated encroachments of fringe areas of forests and truant monsoons have been leading to growing human-animal conflict in Tamil Nadu.

ADVERTISEMENTIn summers, elephants stray out of the forest when waterholes dry up and no green foliage is available to them, putting tremendous pressure on the authorities, mainly the forest department. Officials heave a sigh of relief on driving pachyderms back to forest, only to realise that they have appeared in some other village. 

Environmentalists point out that cultivation of paddy, banana and sugarcane near forests entice elephants to raid them as they struggle to find green fodder inside the forest. Once they taste sugarcane and paddy, they frequently come back to savour them.

Another problem is hooch and it also contributes to the problem. Once, they smell liquor, elephants rush towards the spot and if they consume liquor, problems get compounded. 
Also, the fast disappearance of elepha­nt corridors is contributing for more pachyderms straying into human habitation and creating tension in the area.

Tamil Nadu accounts for nearly one sixth of about 24,000 elephants in India. “Of them, between 700 and 1,000 elephants stray into human habitats regularly. This increases the human-animal conflict in the villages located nearby forest areas,” an official said. 

During 2011-2012, wild elephants killed 47 people in the state and during this year, 37 have lost their lives so far in attacks by pachyderms. Over 2,500 crop damage cases were reported during 2011-2012. At least 20 elephants have died between January and June this year in Sathyamangalam Forest Division alone, mainly because of accidents,  starvation or dehydration.

Records with the state government show that wild elephants accounted for the maximum number of human causalities than leopards and tigers. As per records, only a few instances of leopards attacking humans were reported.

Officials claim that incidents of elepha­nts coming from Karnataka border have also increased in recent times. 

S Venkatesh, a senior environmentalist in Chennai, said animals largely confined to reserves tend to be stressed due to higher densities created by artificial boundaries and lack of opportunities for natural migration. People living in forest areas of Hosur, Dharmapuri, Coimbatore, Nilgiris, Gudalur, Sathyamangalam, Kodaikanal, Dindugul, Tirupattur, Tiruvannamalai, Theni, Srivilliputtur, Tirunelveli, Anaimalai Tiger sanctuary and in Udumalpet and Pollachi, were put to great hardship due to movement of elephants and other wild animals.

He pointed out that though the gover­nment had dug up elephant-proof trenches along 500 km on the main man-animal conflict zones, they still migrate to nearby villages, especially during summer when the water table in the forest reservoirs depletes fast. 

Tamil Nadu has 133 major watersheds and 18,568 micro-water sheds, which form the sources from originating 32 rivers. In spite of it, the State still looks for water from other states.

The problems are compounded as Tamil Nadu comes in rain shadow region and duration of rainfall in the state is generally short with intensities ranging from heavy to very heavy many times. Besides water shortages inside forests, farmers on the periphery take up water-intensive crops. To meet the water demand, they draw ground water, leading to shortages inside the forests. Alarmed over the increasing conflict between humans and wild animals, the Tamil Nadu government has pulled up its socks and has got down to brass tacks. 

A decision has been taken to minimise the conflict by confining animals, especially elephants and large herbivores, to forest areas by constructing suitable rain water harvesting structures and creating fodder sources. 

The objective of the new initiative is also to create permanent water holes, improve water storage and supply, manage and utilise the runoff water purposefully, protect water resources originating in the watershed, enhance ground water recharge and extend the period of availability of water through appropriate intervention. The water harvesting structures raised in these areas will be animal-friendly with easy access to water with no steep slopes around. They will not be death traps. It is estimated that on an average an adult elephant consumes around 250 kg of fodder daily. 

The officials have also identified problematic sites of human-animal competing livestock with reference to water requirements to develop appropriate mitigation strategies. The government has also taken steps to create fodder resources and to improve wildlife habitats inside the forest areas. The project is being implemented in all elephant reserves, including Hosur, Gudalur, Erode, Kodaikanal and Nilgiris.

The state government has increased compensation for death or permanent disability caused due to an animal attack from Rs 1.5 lakh to Rs 3 lakh. The state had paid more than Rs 100 crore compensation in the last two years.