The High Court on Friday ordered issuance of notice to the state government and the Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Ltd (BMRCL) on a public interest litigation (PIL) seeking direction to the authorities to expedite the Metro rail link between Mantri Mall and Majestic. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe division bench of Chief Justice Subhro Kamal Mukherjee and Justice Ravi Malimath issued notice during the hearing on the PIL filed by advocate A V Amaranathan.

The petitioner contended that the line between Mantri Mall and Majestic is not opened though the work is almost complete. The link was not opened only to save money to be spent for the inauguration. 

The petitioner said the link, once opened, will benefit a large population. Amaranathan contended that BMRCL plans to open the link along with the south corridor (Majestic to Puttenahalli), which is expected to be inaugurated by December 2016.

Plea against Jungle Lodges
The High Court on Friday issued notice to the state government and the forest department on a public interest litigation (PIL) seeking direction to stop illegal activities by Jungle Lodges and Resorts at Dubare reserve forest in Kushalnagar in Kodagu district. Petitioners P S Mohan, P Raju, J T Kalinga, Sannappa and V L Chethan, all local residents, contended that Jungle Lodges and Resorts has been running its activities in violation of the Wildlife Protection Act. 

The division bench of Chief Justice Subhro Kamal Mukherjee and Justice Ravi Malimath issued notice to Principal Secretaries of Department of Revenue and Forest, Deputy Commissioner of Kodagu district, Tahashildar of Virajpet taluk and managing director of Jungle Lodges and Resorts Ltd. The petitioners contended that despite their repeated representations, authorities have failed to take action. They said that under the guise of eco-tourism, Jungle Lodges has constructed 18 permanent cottages, allowing campfires for its guests in violation of section 30 of Wildlife Protection Act, using heavy duty generator which is disturbing wildlife and above all, releasing polluted water directly into the river Cauvery. The petitioners claimed that around 70 tribal families in Dubare and illegal activities are disturbing peaceful living. Because of the disturbance, wild animals are entering nearby villages and creating panic, the petitioners contended.

PIL on school holiday 
The High Court on Friday dismissed a public interest litigation (PIL) demanding that holidays to schools be announced by Department of Public Instruction and not by the Deputy Commissioner. The bench of Chief Justice Subhro Kamal Mukherjee and Justice Ravi Malimath dismissed the petition observing that the PIL was filed for publicity and not for any useful purpose.

The PIL, filed by Associated Managements of Government Recognised Schools in Karnataka, sought a direction to the Department of Public Instruction on this after evolving a proper procedure under the Karnataka Education Act, 1953. The PIL was filed in the background of the holiday declared by Deputy Commissioners during the strike called by employee unions of KSRTC and BMTC recently. 

The petition stated that since Deputy Commissioners were asked to declare a holiday depending on the situation, confusion prevailed. The bench stated that unscheduled holidays are declared in certain situations wherein there is apprehension of untoward incidents. 

“If on a particular day, the Deputy Commissioner of a district declares holiday to schools and colleges to prevent any untoward incident, we believe that the guardians will be more happy in as much as their wards will not be exposed to any untoward incident. We therefore, do not find any merit in the petition,” the bench observed while dismissing the petition.