Karnataka has put forth a number of proposals before a high-level committee on amending the Wildlife Protection Act (WPA). 

Simplifying procedures and reducing time taken for major decisions pertaining to land conversion for developmental works, the need to strengthen and speed up laws to prosecute poachers, giving a relook to some of the schedules of the Act as they are very old, redefining the definition of hunting (because whenever animals are captured for research activity, under the present law it mounts to hunting) are among the proposals made by the State, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (wildlife) Vinay Luthra told Deccan Herald.

Proposals sent by the states will be on the agenda of the meeting of the eight-member high-level committee with the heads of the forest department of the states and union ministers. Former cabinet secretary T S R Subramaniam heads the committee. ADVERTISEMENTThis is the first such meeting of the committee. Before this, sub-committee meetings were held in all states to take inputs. In Karnataka, it was held four months ago. 

Luthra said presently, the WPA did not cover all flora and fauna. Thus, there was a need to protect all plants and trees, including sandalwood and other endangered species. 
Dr V B Mathur, director of the Wildlife Institute of India, said that the committee would take opinions from experts before making amendments so that the Act is practical and stronger for better conservation. In the last four to five years, the status of many species has changed and this needs a relook, he said. 

Eco-sensitive and buffer zones are notified under Environmental Protection Act, but WPA is silent on this. This needs a relook in the wake of urbanisation. Wildlife research is important, but there is a need to see how it is done. Thus, the credentials of researchers and teams will be defined. There will also be set guidelines on how to capture animals and on captive management. Laws, ethics and religious aspects of each region will be kept in mind while amending the WPA. 

Praveen Bhargav, trustee of Wildlife First, said that the committee’s report on environmental laws had many flaws and was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee. It is hoped that the Standing Committee ensures that specific inputs provided by conservationists and wildlife scientists, to carefully balance conservation and development, are considered. It is also vital to ensure that the comprehensive definition of hunting (Section 2(16)) is not diluted except to the extent of differentiating between criminal acts of hunting, killing or capturing wild animals for bona fide scientific research by qualified scientists.