A 20-minute short film titled ‘Bannerghatta Breathing for Bengaluru,’ throws light on man-animal conflict, the rich biodiversity of the forest patch spread across 270 square kilometres and challenges due to increasing urbanisation around the forest.

ADVERTISEMENTIt shows the wildlife and biodiversity of the fragmented forest patch in full valour. 

The lone wild tiger roaming in Bannerghatta National Park (BNP) has also been captured in the film.  

 It also covers the problems which the department has been facing because of shrinking land due increasing denotification and mining. The movie also dwells on the history on how the forest patch was notified, how the zoo was carved out of it and how land was added to the patch to strengthen elephant corridors.

The film has been commissioned by Sunil Panwar, Deputy Conservator of Forest, BNP and has been filmed by conservationists and film makers duo Ashok Hallur and Padma Ashok of Ideas for Change. The film was released on Friday by Governor Vajubhai Vala.
 
Butterfly Walk 
The Karnataka Forest Department will organise a Butterfly Walk in Hennur Park on Sunday, October 9, for Bengalureans. The park spread across 34 acres has over 34 species of butterflies. During the walk, people will be shown different species, the host plants, the larvae and the nectar plants. Apart from Forest department officials, experts are also being roped in to create more awareness among people. 

The Forest department has created three artificial ponds in the park and improved the biodiversity to increase the number of species to the park. The open storm water drain passing through the park, has little impact on the butterflies. This park along with parks in Jarakabandekaval and Doreswamypalya. The green environs of Doraisanipalya Jallary Reserve Forest off Bannerghatta Road is home varied species of butterfly. 

BBP open on Vijayadashami
The Bannerghatta Biological Park will remain open on October 11, on the occasion of Vijayadashami. Tuesday is normally a holiday. The management this time has decided to keep it open, said an press release.