In an effort to bring down the incidents of man-animal conflict, the Forest department has come out with an unique idea to erect a stone wall on an experimental basis on the fringes of the forests near Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary, in Hanur, Chamarajanagar district.

Though the stone wall is not a strong deterrent as the wild animals can still cross over it, the efforts of the Forest department has been widely appreciated by the villagers in the vicinity.

The incidents of wild animals straying into human habitats is on the rise in Shagya, Bandalli, Managalli, Kallidoddi, Ganimangala and other villages. They forage on crops and sometimes even attack humans, guarding the crops.

Considering the problem seriously, the Forest department collected boulders available in the forests and used them to construct a strong wall, under Human Animal Conflict scheme of the government, which had released Rs 18 crore for the purpose.

The length of the compound is 680 metres, that begins from Boodikere Chain Gate and extends up to Padarayanagudde. The wall is of 2.25 metres tall and 2 metres wide. The Forest department officials hope to prevent straying of elephants, wild boars, deers and other wild animals.

Besides, it would also stop illegal entry of humans into the forests. There are possibilities of the elephant trenches that are dug on the borders of the forests getting closed with soil, especially during rainy season. Moreover, shepherds, who graze the livestock in the forests also close them for their convenience.

Though the stone wall is said to be safe, it is not possible to erect the wall at all places. The walls can be erected at places where it is not possible to dig trenches, and in regions where animal interference is more.

Moreover, it is difficult to collect boulders of equal size and transport them. If the miscreants do not damage them, the walls will be of great help to the farmers.

Speaking to Deccan Herald, Lokesh, RFO, Cauvery Wil- dlife Zone, said that the department came with the idea following pressure from the villagers to prevent attack by wild animals. Chamarajanagar Circle Chief Conservator of Forests B P Ravi, will inspect the works soon, he added.