The six tiger poachers who were arrested from the Biligiriranganathaswamy Tiger (BRT) Reserve Forest on Saturday have close links with international wildlife smugglers, said Vijay Mohan, Director and Forest Conservator of BRT Reserve Forest.

ADVERTISEMENTThough no mobile phones were found from the accused, who are natives of Haryana and belong to the ‘Bawariya’ tribe, a Scheduled Tribe, a book containing phone numbers of international wildlife smugglers has been found, he told Deccan Herald. Jaw traps laid by them have been recovered.

Jagadish, Jalarsingh, Lakumchand, Rothas, Bimal Devi and Pappu, residents of Suduri village in Panchkula district of Haryana were arrested when they were coming out the forest after laying jaw traps.

The discovery was made after the jaw trap found at BRT Reserve Forest matched with the ones found at Tadoba-Anderi Tiger Reserve Forest in Maharashtra, a few months. 

With the help of Wildlife Crime Control Bureau and a few NGOs working for the protection of wildlife, the identities were established, Forest officials said.

They said the community members had expertise in trapping and killing tigers. The accused, who belong to two families, came to Doddinduwadi in Kollegal taluk one-and-a-half-month ago under the guidance of notorious tiger poachers Balku and Periya.

However, the families, who camped in the forest area a week ago under the guise of selling plastic decorative flowers, comprised 15 members including eight children.

 The children would to go sell flowers in the morning while a few adults would monitor the movements of tigers in the region, officers said. They would then inform others, who had expertise in laying jaw traps.

The officers said the members came to Bangalore from Delhi by train and from the reached forest area via Mandya, T Narsipura and Kollegal. The members of the gang received Rs 3,000 each as advance money.

During interrogation, the accused said they received Rs 30,000 to 40,000 per tiger pelt. They were given a map of BRT Reserve Forest by Balku and Periya to carry out their operations.

Forest officials, along with the Bandipur Tiger Protection Force, have intensified the search in BRT Reserve Forest following the discovery of traps, officers said.