At one point the agent suggested they give up, but Pinto pressed on and finally, an hour later, they found the nine-acre plot. Substantially overgrown, they recognised it by some concrete steps and a shack that the previous owner had left behind.

But looking around him, Pinto envisioned much more. At the time, he had been looking for a tract to build a vacation home for his family, then based in Miami. When he saw the dramatic ocean view, fly-by toucans and dozens of upside-down basket-like Montezuma Oropendola bird nests hanging from enormous trees, he decided on the spot that he wanted to move to Costa Rica for good.

“It called to me,” said Pinto, 41, who owns with his wife, Emmanuelle Pinto, the vacation rental management company Caribe Sur. 

“I had a vision of kids running around. I was bored of working up the corporate ladder in the US. I called my wife and told her I wanted to live here permanently.” At the time, Pinto was working as a director at a pharmaceutical research group and Pinto, 42, was a sales director for an online diamond company.

From the moment the couple found and bought (for $72,000) the land, things moved relatively quickly. 

The family sold their house in Miami in June 2002, moved into a nearby rental house in Cocles Beach in Costa Rica and started building two months later.

Construction of the house was completed in August 2003 for a total cost of $135,000, including the price to bring in electricity and build the road.

Tropical architecture

The design for the house was inspired from the tropical architecture books Pinto had collected over the years. He and his wife sat with Buffile and showed him their favourite houses.

“We knew that we wanted high ceilings, a big kitchen and for the bottom floor to be completely open to the outdoors,” Pinto said. “We wanted a huge terrace on the top floor, but Nicolas told us that the living space is always downstairs. We argued about it and he finally gave us a small terrace upstairs which we now never use — he was right.”
Soon after the Pintos moved to Costa Rica they started a real estate company that manages many of the vacation rental houses in the area.

And how is it living in a home with almost no walls? 

“We never have humidity problems because the position of the house and its design allows for constant natural ventilation,” Pinto said. “In the daytime we get the breeze from the ocean. At night we get a breeze from the mountain. We actually sleep with comforters.”

The family’s two bedrooms and a master bathroom are on the second floor. The floor has walls but they are open and screened about two feet under the roof. There are no drawers; instead they store all their clothes in hanging wardrobes with some shelves that are covered by a door of wooden slats.

“The closets are also continuously ventilated,” Pinto said. “So our clothes never get moldy or musty.” 

Invaded by army ants

Of course with primary rain forest in their back yard and a house so exposed to the elements, the Pintos must welcome the occasional unexpected visitors.

 About once a month, the house gets completely invaded by millions of army ants.
“We call them the cleaners,” Pinto said. “We just let them do their job. 

They attack and kill any live insect in the house and carry out all the dead insects. If you didn’t know what was going on you’d think it was the end of the world. Sometimes the walls are black with them all. If we have guests, they see it and freak out. So we just go to the beach for a few hours.”

Despite the insects, the Pintos have no regrets. 

“We took a leap of faith and jumped out of the system and we’ve never looked back,” Pinto said. “For everything we left behind or lost we have gained so much more in quality of life. I spend so much time with my children and I watch them grow up. Every dream I had I have realised since moving here.”ADVERTISEMENT