Manish Singh has just appeared for his FYBA exams and his results are expected to come out soon. Instead of spending his vacation relaxing, Manish decided to take up a job at an event management company in Delhi. “It is a good opportunity for me to get exposure to a real work environment and to earn some pocket money,” he says.

Manish is a career-driven youngster who wants to start earning early in life and accumulate precious work experience. He is willing to grab any opportunity in any field which will help him achieve his career goals and give him a chance to earn some money. 
He has many options to choose from. Several companies offer internships and they often visit campuses to recruit students. First of all, you have to keep your CV updated. 
Sometimes companies place advertisements in various local newspapers and magazines.
The sectors that are constantly scouting for manpower are:

Retail: This is among the fastest growing sectors in India. It is moving towards modernisation and consolidation, generating employment for innumerable people. 
Increasing disposable income, purchasing power and awareness levels are leading to the growth of the sector. Every retail store depends on the sales force to sell its merchandise. If you enjoy interacting with people and like to be a part of the customer’s final purchasing decision, then retail sales is the job for you.  

Everyone, from an undergrad to an MBA-holder, can find a job to suit his accomplishments. The skills required to grow in this sector are people skills, zeal, communication skills and team spirit. To excel in this challenging sector, you must have an outgoing personality to interact with customers.

Voluntary sector: If you wish to work for those who are deprived, helpless and in distress, then you should explore jobs in the not-for-profit sector. NGOs working in areas such as education, environment, community health, urban development, human rights and so on need  manpower at every level of their operations.

Event management: An extended arm of advertising and marketing, the concept of event management has evolved considerably. Not just for artiste management, companies these days are hiring event management professionals for experiential connect, brand building and image makeovers targeted at a niche audience. An event management company requires designers, logistics specialists, artists, copywriters and a whole host of experts at different stages. 

Travel & Tourism: Even with comparatively low levels of international tourist traffic, tourism has emerged as an important segment of the Indian economy. 

People usually travel for business and pleasure, but over the last decade, the nature of tourism has developed in scope and direction, away from these traditional activities to a wide range of new activities such as sports and leisure, adventure tourism and eco-tourism. 

Jobs are available as tour guides, camp leaders, volunteers, etc. Currently, India offers various types of tourism such as wildlife tourism, adventure tourism, spiritual tourism etc.
BPOs: Call centres are also a popular choice for students keen on keeping busy during vacations and making decent money. One has to be prepared to work in shifts. The perks are many and attractive. 

You could be part of a team handling customer support services, telemarketing services, technical support services, employee IT help-desk services, insurance services, data entry services, data conversion services, scanning OCR with editing & indexing services, online research and form processing services.

Skills that can find you a job

Employers want motivated youngsters who have a positive attitude, willingness to work hard and show leadership qualities. You need to show your employer that you are a good investment, both for the current position as well as for any potential future positions. The key points to remember are that you are earning money, you are gaining experience, and you are making good contacts. 
ADVERTISEMENT