Union Minister of State for Environment and Forest Prakash Javadekar assured that a decision on implementation of Kasturirangan report recommendations would be taken by year-end.

ADVERTISEMENTSpeaking to reporters here on Thursday, the Union minister said, “Barring Kerala, six other States are yet to submit the proposal. Soon after receiving the proposals, a meeting of the chief ministers of all states concerned will be convened and a decision will be taken for the benefit of people.” 

“Around 7,000 villages come under the report and the state governments have to visit each village and collect opinion of the villagers on what kind of development activity they want to be banned, regulated and which can be done freely. Maharashtra, Goa, Gujarat and Tamil Nadu would submit the report within 15 days and Karnataka is yet to submit,” he said.

About the possibility of relaxation of CRZ rules, the minister said that in the 7,500 km coastline, development should be undertaken in a sustainable manner. 

So, a review has been done after discussion and a final decision would be taken within two to three months. The development of coastal roads is also considered, the minister added.

Prakash Javadekar further said that there are around 600 protected areas in the country including national parks and wildlife sanctuaries. As there was delay in identifying buffer zones, the Centre has appointed a specialist team to assess states’ proposals. At present, the environment ministry has gazetted 170 eco-sensitive zones, it would increase by the year end.

Petrol, diesel prices

The minister said that compared to the UPA era, petrol is six rupees cheaper and diesel is five rupee cheaper. The government is revising the fuel price every fortnightly. Moreover, the government has given Rs 14,000 crore subsidy to electrical vehicles. The government has charted out a scheme to produce around 1,75,000 mega watts of renewable energy. 

The minister said that for the first time after Independence, tribals will get minimum support price for their products.

Passage of Bills 

Meanwhile, the minister said that the government has the confidence of passing both Goods and Service Tax (GST) Bill and Land Acquisition Bill in the Parliament. “All will come together for national interest, that’s all about politics in democracy. It is not creating hurdles, but working together for nation building,” he said.
DH News Service