How much can a morning walk mean to you? A drear-eyed stroll to the neighbourhood park or a round of the colony to keep yourself fit? If that is all that comes to your mind, meet Let’s Walk Gurgaon, lovingly called LWG - a 2000 plus community of early morning walkers in Gurgaon who are exploring the satellite city like never before.

These adventure lovers together discover the untouched greens of Gurgaon - its villages, hills, ‘developed’ and ‘undeveloped’ biodiversity spots and wildlife. Alongside, they make new friends, enjoy a weekly picnic and discover the joys of a morning walk completely anew.

This group has been running, rather walking, for over two years now. Sehba Imam, a writer and resident of DLF Phase III, Gurgaon and the brain behind this group informs Metrolife, “As a writer, I often scribble into the wee hours of night. One such night in 2010, after I finished work around four in the morning, I decided to take my dog out for a walk.”

“We wandered into the biodiversity park close to my house and I was astonished to see how beautiful it looks at dawn. After a two-hour long, literally eye-opening walk, I came back home and informed my friends about it. Together, we decided to go for more such walks and in fact institutionalise it in the form of a Facebook group. Within a month, we had 200 members and now it is 2000 plus and counting.” 

She adds that it includes school and college students, housewives, professionals and anyone who wants to join them. The youngest regular walker in the group is a four-and-a-half year old, who drags his mother to the excursions every morning, and the oldest is a 65-year old who little minds the cold and the steep climbs.     

Earlier, they used to go for one walk a week - Saturday mornings, 4:30 in summer and 6:30 in winter. Now they have started a monthly full-moon night walk as well. One or two persons do a reccee beforehand and then the whole group follows it.

Sehba says, “We generally start from a village like say, Sehjavas, Tikli, Mangar, Damdama or Bhondsi Ashram and then meander into the Aravalli foothills nearby. We have discovered beautiful green spots, lakes, wildlife like whole families of foxes, neelgai, peacocks and other birds.”

“We have breakfast together and make new friends. It is also a great opportunity to teach your children discipline, organisational skills and team work. We always move together making sure no one, whether children or the elderly, are left behind.”

There is one more unexpected benefit of these morning excursions. Sehba says, “When we visit a village, especially in the small hours, people always have this fear that the inhabitants may harm them. The urban-rural divide in Gurgaon is anyways 
infamous.”

“Fortunately though, in our more than two years of walking, we have never had any unpleasant incident. The villagers welcome us into their homes, enquire about our walks and even offer hookah, chhachh, chai etc. It really helps bridge a mental gap we carry in our minds today.”

LWG has mapped many green nooks and crannies of Gurgaon already but they insist that there’s plenty more to unravel. Sehba says, “We want to do it all as fast as possible. Many forests we saw a year back are plots for flats and malls now. Who knows if Gurgaon stays the same in future or not?”      
ADVERTISEMENT