St Joseph’s College of Arts and Science recently put together a wildlife fest 
titled ‘Wild 3.0’ on its campus. 

ADVERTISEMENTAt the fest, one got to see a lot of students evincing an interest in preservation and conservation of wildlife. In addition to a host of events such as ‘Cooking Without Fire’, street dance and debate, the highlight of the fest was a photography exhibition, which featured the works of participants from across the country.  

The students were enthusiastic and participated in as many events as they could. The girls took to ‘Cooking Without Fire’ while the boys settled for Western and street dance. Andria and Lydia, both students of second-year BSc, formed a team for ‘Cooking Without Fire’. “We thought we would make chocolate balls. It requires crushed 
biscuits, cocoa powder, sugar and some milk. It’s easy and ready to eat,” explains Andria. Lydia pitches in, “I don’t really cook at home but I get to test my skills in cooking only at events like this.” 

The photography exhibition, which had more than 20 participants, was by and large the best. Armed with their cameras, the students ventured out almost two months prior to the fest. 

Rajoth, a second-year BSc student, says that he was never interested in photography until he went with his father and his father’s friend to a wildlife sanctuary. “It was 
after that experience that I began to take interest in bird photography. I would go off with my camera to Bannerghatta National Park or some place close by to click pictures of birds which is what I have displayed at the exhibition,” he explains. 

Naresh, a final-year BSc student, shot a couple of insects as his contribution to the exhibition. “I kept an eye out for small insects such as the housefly and jewel bug, which can be clearly seen only with a macro lens. I spent a lot of time at Lalbagh just to capture a few images,” explains Naresh.

 Talking about the fest and the theme in particular, Kiran Jeevan with the Department of Social Work observes that only fests like this would bring today’s generation closer to the environment and to wildlife conservation. “We notice that students have a certain disconnect when it comes to wildlife and they don’t seem to bother about the importance of preserving and protecting our natural resources and wildlife in particular. 

Fests like this create an awareness on the importance of wildlife. In addition to a host of other events, wildlife will be the focus,” he explains.