Romance during the holiday season

ADVERTISEMENTIn ‘Some Girls’, an American college student (played by Patrick Dempsey) spends Christmas with his girlfriend’s (essayed by   Jennifer Connelly) outlandishly odd family in Quebec City. The movie has elements           of both comedy and romance and also stars Sheila Kelley, Lance Edwards, Lila Kedrova and Florinda Bolkan. Watch ‘Some Girls’ on MGM at 9 pm on March 26. 

Nutritious and easy to prepare

Jamie’s 15 Minute Meals’ pushes the concept of fast, everyday food to the next level. Efficiently squeezing the cooking process into very little time, each episode will offer two exciting family meals, back to back. In addition to this, Jamie has also focussed on reducing the calorie content of the dishes so that the viewer can serve a nutritionally-balanced meal to his or her family, every day of the week. Catch the show on TLC at 9 pm on March 26.

Complicated web of lies

In ‘Just Go With It’, a plastic surgeon romancing a much younger schoolteacher enlists his loyal assistant to pretend to be his soon-to-be ex-wife, in order to cover up a careless lie. When more lies backfire, the assistant’s kids become involved and everyone heads off for a weekend in Hawaii that will change all their lives. The movie stars Adam Sandler, Jennifer Aniston, Dan Patrick, Brooklyn Decker and Dave Matthews. Catch ‘Just Go With It’ on Star Movies at 4.02 pm on March 26.

Back and forth in time

The Time Machine’ stars Guy Pearce, Samantha Mumba, Mark Addy, Sienna Guillory and Phyllida Law. This film is about Alexander Hartdegen, a scientist and inventor, who is working hard to prove that time travel is possible. When the girl he is in love with is tragically killed, Alexander is determined to go back in time and bring his girlfriend back to life. He creates a time machine that takes him 800,000 years into the future instead of a few months behind. Will he be able to return to his time safely? The movie airs on WB at 5.14 pm on March 26. 

A heist without a hitch

Armored’ stars Matt Dillon, Jean Reno, Laurence Fishburne, Amaury Nolasco, Milo Ventimiglia and Skeet Ulrich. This movie is about Mike Cochrane, who works for Eagle Shield Security. He helps his friend and war veteran Ty Hackett — who is having a tough time financially as he is raising his brother Jimmy alone — get a job at the agency. When Mike suggests that they get together to rob two armoured trucks transporting 42 million dollars, Ty is unable to refuse. Mike promises him that no one will get hurt during the heist. But will he be able to keep his promise?  Catch the film on Zee Studio at 4.50 pm on March 26 to find out.  

The beauty of a continent

Wildest Africa’ is a celebration of Africa’s most spectacular locations, showcasing the full African experience. The show journeys from the cradle of human civilisation to the most awe-inspiring natural wonders of the world, but going on a safari to see the different wild animals. Through this show, viewers can discover their secret locations, cultural and wildlife issues and how the natural wonders are being threatened by different environmental pressures. Watch the show on Animal Planet at 8 pm on March 26.