Rainfall has receded in several parts of the State, with most of the districts receiving moderate to intermittent showers. While it drizzled in a few parts,  a few others have hardly received any rainfall. With this, life has come back to normal and most of the activities have resumed.

ADVERTISEMENTIntermittent rain continued to lash several parts of Shimoga district on Tuesday. Taluks like Sagar, Shimoga, Thirthahalli, Shikaripura, Hosanagar, parts of Sorab and Bhadravathi received rain.

However, the district did not receive heavy rainfall and even the intensity of rain was less, when compared to last week. Following scanty rainfall, the water levels in rivers Tunga, Varada, Kumudwathi and Sharavathy have receded. The flood situation in Sagar taluk has improved. 

With the water level receding in River Cauvery, boating activities resumed at the popular Ranganathittu Bird Sanctuary, near KRS reservoir, after gap of 27 days in Mandya district. Boating was temporarily suspended since July 16, as the river was in spate.

 Now, all 12 boats including two fibre boats have resumed boating. The decision in this regard was taken by Forest department (Wildlife division) and Revenue department. 

More than 250 people went boating to watch the birds on Tuesday, said Ranganathittu Sanctuary Assistant Range Forest Officer Lakshmeesh. Currently, Ibis, Egrets, Cormorants, Herons, Snakebirds and other rare birds can be spotted.

With suspension of boating, the Forest department has incurred a loss of Rs 10 lakh. The department had suspended boating last year too for more than a month, suffering a loss of Rs 12 lakh, Lakshmeesh added.

A short break

After a short break, rainfall resumed across Kodagu and Dakshina Kannada districts on Tuesday. Heavy rain lashed Mangalore and Madikeri in the morning. Intermittent rain continued to lash a few parts of the district. The inflow of water into Harangi reservoir has increased and 3,200 cusecs water is released into the river.

 Two houses were partially damaged following rain in Dundalli gram panchayat near Shanivarasanthe. A cattle has lost its life due to the cold weather. Moderate rainfall was reported in the coastal and Malnad regions of Uttara Kannada district, while, it has weakened in the semi-arid regions. 

Bhatkal, Honnavar, Kumta, Ankola and Karwar received intermittent rainfall, while, it is drizzling in Sirsi, Siddapur and Yellapur. Haliyal, Mundag­od and Joida have not received any rainfall.