The show looks into the problems of a futuristic mega city and analyses emerging green technologies that can be incorporated to solve some of the most common problems of a fast-growing city. 

It is a six-part series, where each part is dedicated to problems like how to provide enough food and water; increasing energy efficiency of the buildings in a city; finding clean energy sources and alternatives for fossil fuels for transportation and waste management. The show will be telecast world-wide on November 22. 

Rahul Johri, senior vice-president, Discovery Networks Asia-Pacific, said that the main intention behind the show was to let viewers around the globe know of the channel’s vision for the future. “This is a channel that has always catered to the needs of the viewers; 10 years ago, we began with wildlife programmes, then gradually made our foray into programmes on space, history and engineering, all being receptive to the needs of the viewers. Ecopolis, resonating with the current theme of discussions worldwide, speaks of solutions to some of the most common problems of urbanisation,” he added.

This show will be hosted by Dr Daniel Kammen, a Nobel laureate, who will assess each of the emerging technologies based on scalability and its ability to reduce carbon dioxide emissions. At the end of each episode, he will pick one technology as the best solution. In the final episode, he will evaluate the previously ranked technologies and determines which needs to be implemented immediately to improve the ecological state of a city.
The channel will also produce a series of short films called Ecovisions to follow up the series and will feature key Indian industry leaders discussing their vision regarding a sustainable future for our planet. 

The series will have a lot of relevance as far as Indian cities are concerned as we are already battling the evils of urbanisation and with time, will see the problems intensifying. The series introduces scientists who have incorporated these technologies in their respective countries at a smaller scale. However, most of the technologies discussed are not very cost-effective currently but do have the promise of becoming so by 2050. The show will be aired every Monday at 9 pm.ADVERTISEMENT