Jammu and Kashmir government’s ambitious plan to launch ecotourism in protected areas like Dachigam sanctuary has been grounded with the wildlife authorities maintaining that human interference has disturbed animals and their habitat.

ADVERTISEMENTSources told Deccan Herald that authorities have taken a decision to close Dachigam Wildlife Sanctuary for tourists from Wednesday.

They said the the decision was taken in the backdrop of rising pollution and disturbance to the wildlife due to a heavy rush of tourists. At least 1,500 people have been visiting the sanctuary every day during the last three months.

The sanctuary is a natural habitat of the endangered Hangul or the Kashmir stag – the only species of  red deer found in India – leopard, black bear and other animals.
Wildlife warden Mohammad Sadiq Mir confirmed that the Sanctuary has been closed for the general public.

“Heavy rush of tourists disturbed the ecological balance and there was apprehension that animals might run away from the park if human interference continued,” he said.

Mir said it is breeding season for the hangul. “There are nearly 200 Kashmir stag in the sanctuary and this is the fawning period for them. The decision to ban the entry of general public was taken on the instructions of chief  wildlife warden A K Singh,” he added.

A senior official said a few hundred vehicles used to enter the sanctuary every day and roam inside the park. 

“It isn’t permissible to drive vehicles inside the sanctuary as blowing of horns disturbs wild animals. However, for the last few months the sanctuary gave the impression of being a bus stand,” he said.

Till last year people who wished to visit the sanctuary had to take permission from the chief wildlife warden and only a few passes were issued daily, he said.

The official said rules had been relaxed in a bid to attract tourists. “Government had hired Jungle Lodges and Resorts, a Government of Karnataka undertaking considered to be a pioneer of ecotourism and conservation of ecology and wildlife, as consultants. However, the initiative had been opposed tooth and nail by several officers of the department,” he said.

Former principal chief conservator of forest and chief wildlife warden  Abdul Rashid Wani says there is no harm in launching ecotourism in wildlife protected areas.
“But it should be restricted to staying of tourists in tents, bird watching and trekking. Then it can’t affect wild animals,” Wani said.

“Till a few decades ago, we used to organise visits of students, scientists and tourists to wildlife protected areas in the state.”

This is the only way to develop better understanding of wildlife among the humans. 
“The government needs to rethink its decision on ecotourism in wildlife areas, and form a committee of experts to identity the modalities of starting it at the earliest.”