The panel, headed by Prof K Kasturirangan and appointed by the Centre to evaluate the Western Ghats Ecology Expert Panel (WGEEP) report, will on Sunday carry out a field inspection at the proposed Gundia Hydro Electric Project site located in Hassan district. ADVERTISEMENTIt is being done to assess the extent of impact the project could have on the Western Ghats. The nine-member panel, which has completed its field visits in Maharashtra, is presently in Karnataka. On Friday, it held meetings with the State government (chief secretary and officials of departments concerned) and received representations from stakeholders including NGOs and coffee planters from Kodagu.

Sources told Deccan Herald that the visit to Gundia is crucial as the State government is going ahead with the hydro project despite stiff opposition from locals and environmentalists. The WGEEP, headed by Madhav Gadgil, had also advised the Centre and the State not to execute the project owing to the fact that the project fell within the ecologically sensitive zone of the Western Ghats.

The team will visit Gundia, Kempuhole, Shiradi Ghat and Yettinahole during the earlier part of the day, and will later hold discussions with the Hassan district administration. It is said to leave Hassan by evening and halt the night in Bangalore, and depart to New Delhi on Monday.

Over 10 organisations from Hassan district are said to submit their representations to the panel, which has to give its report to the Centre by mid-February. The Malenadu Janapara Horata Samiti (MJHS) is submitting a representation asking the panel to advise the MoEF to ask the Karnataka Power Corporation to spike the project and instead implement solar power projects. The project site lies within the Mysore Elephant Reserve and is just 10 km away from the Pushpagiri Wildlife Sanctuary, violating the Wildlife Protection Act, contends the MJHS.

The WGEEP has termed the Western Ghats as extremely ecologically sensitive region and has sought for banning/restriction of mining and other development activities, which was opposed by several state governments, including Maharashtra and Kerala.

Owning to this and other factors, the Centre abstained from implementing the report and came under severe criticisms from various sectors. It then constituted the Kasturirangan panel and asked it to evaluate the Gadgil report. Sources in the panel said that there were mixed reactions to the WGEEP recommendations by stakeholders in Karnataka. While some had ‘agreed’, some had given their ‘partial consent’, while there were some who had expressed ‘complete disagreement’ to the suggestions.

The sources said that the panel “was in sync with the spirit of the Gadgil report”. As the matter is very “complex”, the panel is using “sensitive geo spatial data”, which had not even been made available to the Gadgil committee.

Spatial data with much finer resolution (30 meters x 30 meters) has been sought from National Remote Sensing Agency of ISRO and others, and is being superimposed to ascertain the ground conditions of the natural and cultural landscape. This would also help ascertaining the boundaries, encroachments and developmental activities.