There may not be news of breeding success amongst the five tigers relocated to the Sariska tiger reserve, but experts still remain optimistic over the fate of the animals and their ability to multiply.

ADVERTISEMENTThough two of the relocated female tigers at the reserve were said to have miscarried, it may not be a serious set back if environment around the Park is improved for the animals to breed. 

Dr K Shankar from the Dehradun-based Wildlife Institute of India, who is part of the expert team associated with the Sariska project, said hormone tests on the two tigers – ST-2 and ST-3 – revealed the two had miscarried despite being successful in conceiving. 

“This reveals that the three female and two male tigers translocated from Ranthambore National Park are mating  and two of the females are able to conceive,” Dr Shankar, speaking at a seminar titled Rebuilding Sariska: Challenges Ahead, said.

“We are analysing the reasons for the abortion,” the expert told audience at the seminar organised by the Sariska Tiger Foundation here at Alwar on Saturday. 

Though tests are needed to ascertain the precise reasons, experts believe human activities in and around the Park is adding stress on the animals causing adverse impact on their breeding. 
WII ex-director Dr H S Panwar admitted stress on the animals in Sariska remains high. 

“The animals are facing stress due to a large human presence in and around the reserve,” he said. 

“Even wild animals need conducive and peaceful environment to breed and multiply.” 

Dr Shankar said that stress levels of the animals are being assessed on the scats tests. 

The forest department had recently shifted the village of Umri out of the Park’s vicinity. However, 28 villages around the Park and nine within the notified area still exist. 

Director of Sariska Tiger Reserve RS Shekawat said the forest department faces a daunting task of shifting the nearly 2454 families away from the areas of the Park. 

The slow depletion of vegetation, as the villagers on the Park’s edges fell trees for fuel, is also a serious challenge for the authorities. 

Shekawat said providing LPG connections to the villagers would minimise their dependency on the forest for firewood. Though a beginning has been made in this  direction, there is a long way to go, he added. 

Experts believe Sariska has one of the highest grey density in the country and can be rebuilt. 
Offering more suggestions at the event Dr Shankar said the Park can accommodate up to 15 tigers, but maximising vegetation and minimising human intrusion into the area must be given more importance to improve the chances of breeding amongst relocated tigers.