Every little movement on the South Korean side is monitored by American soldiers and officials who are part of the UN command under the provisions of the ‘Armistice Agreement’ signed in July 1953 that ended the dreadful war between the two Koreas. Externally, an eerie silence hangs over rain-drenched greenery.

The JSA visitors centre is just the entry point to the DMZ area, where all the identification papers are checked and visitors asked to board a designated bus that drives through the buffer zone to the nearby ‘Military Demarcation Line (MDL)’.

Escorted by a young and alert American soldier, visitors get a feel of the hilly terrain. Atop hillocks on both sides, there are ‘observation posts’. On either side, ringed by hills, for several miles run green paddy fields, cultivated by the local people of the Tae Song Dong village, also called the ‘freedom village’.

As of now, there are 212 people living in the freedom village, says the American escort-soldier. They are mostly descendants of farming families living there for generations. Being in the buffer zone, they are not required to pay any federal taxes as they do not come under the administrative control of the South Korean government,  though they have to return home well ahead of the night-fall.  

Interestingly, “No man from outside can marry any girl in the freedom village, but girls within the village are free to marry anyone they wished,” says Jason Chudy, a UNC public affairs spokesman. Thus, some time back a young Korean girl in that village married an American soldier, he said.

Traversing about 2.5 km along that strip and crossing at least three check-points on way, we came close to the MDL. Before you are led in to have a glimpse the actual line – a long patch of cement casing—you barely realise that half that complex is in South Korea and the other half is North Korea.

On the South Korean side is a palatial ‘Peace House’, which was built in 1985. It is used as the venue for the famous six-nation talks including North and South Korea for de-nuclearisation of North Korea. They are not sure when the next round of those talks will be held.

Freedom House
To its right is another big structure called the ‘Freedom House’, where possibly talks concerning the reunification of North and South Korea could take place. As you walk through the huge hall of the Freedom House, at its rear are a row of small ‘Blue Buildings’ of the UN where the military level talks take place.

Cross an yellow line that runs in the middle, and you de facto step into North Korea. A key building nearby houses the office of the UN Command Military Armistice Commission, where even the chairs and tables are arranged in such a way to indicate the North and the South Korean sides respectively.

There is a telephone line connection to communicate day-to-day messages from the South Korean to the North Korean side. But if the latter do not respond, the UNC officials will stand on the South Korean side of the MDL with a loud-speaker in hand and loudly convey the message to the North Korean side. The whole idea of this arrangement is to avoid even the slightest provocation.

Right behind the UN Blue Buildings is another big building in brownish grey on the North Korean side of the MDL, from where their soldiers keep a constant vigil. At times, even trees have to be trimmed on the South Korean side periodically to ‘ensure a clear line of sight,’ explains Jason to the Indian media.

On one such occasion in 1976 when American soldiers came to cut an over-grown tree, two North Koreans had intruded and killed two US army officers, said Jason. There is a memorial stone there to commemorate that tragedy. Even a tunnel dug by North Koreans to invade the South was discovered in 1978.

With nobody allowed to hunt in the buffer zone, over the years the DMZ has become a haven for wildlife, supporting some 1,200 species of plants and a variety of fauna including cranes and Chinese vultures, the officials said.

Enforcing an armistice is an arduous task by itself, to ensure no flare-ups take place. But the grim silence that accompanies the daily regimen is also pregnant with meaning. 

“A majority of Korean youth want both Koreas to reunite and they are hopeful it will happen one day,” says our interpreter from South Korea.

It is no easy process, the interpreter adds. But their hopes are not entirely without a basis, as US mediated efforts to quicken the resumption of the six-nation talks including the two Koreas for ending the North Korean nuclear mess, has again just begun.   ADVERTISEMENT