Photography classes for women 

ADVERTISEMENTCinematic Labs will conduct regular Sunday classes exclusively for women on still and video photography. The classes are meant for beginners, enthusiasts, amateurs and hobbyists of all age groups. The classes comprise of indoor and outdoor photography, fashion photography, creating modelling portfolios, TV serials, video journalism, TV reporting, documentaries, short films, wildlife and nature photography, TV news reading, TV show anchoring, celebrity interviews, talk shows etc,. The entire programme is practical oriented and workshops will be conducted by celebrity photographers. A free introductory session will be conducted on Sundays at 6th block, Koramangala. For details, call: 97405 02692.  
   
University of Northampton’s counselling sessions

Representatives from the University of Northampton (UK), will be visiting Bangalore on February 6, to meet prospective students and answer their queries. Rhia Bevan, International Recruitment Manager for India at the University, will be at the British Council Education Fair at Hotel Vivanta between 1 pm and 7 pm where students can discuss their study options and ask her any questions about studying in the UK or the University of Northampton.

The University of Northampton also offers a 25 per cent merit scholarship for international students applying for both undergraduate and Masters courses. All students applying to the University will be considered for the bursary.

To seek an appointment with Rhia Bevan during her visit to Bangalore, contact her at rhia.bevan@northampton.ac.uk. For further information on the University, visit www.northampton.ac.uk

ISME seminar

The International School of Management Excellence (ISME) organised a one-day seminar on “Professional value for Managers-Curriculum to careers” on January 7, 2012 at its campus in Whitefield, Bangalore. The objective of the conference was threefold: To highlight the importance of inculcating professional values at the management level; Identify and align professional values related to individual, group and organisations cultural aspect in different functional areas; To identify action plans for converting pre-acquired behavioural values to professional values for managerial careers. This conference brought together some of the leaders from the industry and academia to address the significance of values and professional ethics in today’s world.

‘Art of Story Telling’ workshop

Pre-school Teachers Training Institute, Bangalore is conducting a workshop on “The Art of Story Telling”  by Dr Vatsala Iyengar on January 22, 2012 between 9.30 am and 5.30 pm. Venue: “B” Narayanapura, ITPB Main Road, Next to Govindappa Choultry, Near K R Puram Railway Station, Bangalore-16. Contact: 080- 65791715, 9844557052.

Registration fee: Rs. 950 per head (Including study materials, stationery, lunch, participation certificate.)

For registrations you can also mail pstti.bangalore@gmail.com

Win internships through Internfair

Internshala recently announced the launch of ‘Internfair’ – a unique online contest for students, where the winners will get an opportunity to win an internship with different companies and organisations. Leading insurance firm Berkshire, National Social Entrepreneurship Forum, NGO Teach for India and Proof Of Performance Data Services, have tied up with Internshala for the contest, and will be offering internships to the winners. The contest, will see students from all over India competing with each other to win prizes worth lakhs in addition to internship offers from partnering companies. Given the diverse range of events, there is something for everyone and hence students from all educational backgrounds (Engineering, MBA, Commerce, Arts, Social Science etc.) can participate in Internfair. In order to participate, one has to log on to www.internshala.com/internfair. One can also log on to FB page (https://www.facebook.com/Internshala) to know more about the contest.

Chevening media scholarship programme

There is a new short-term scholarship programme announced under the UK Government funded Chevening Scholarships for media professionals. The Chevening South Asia Journalism Programme: ‘Good Governance in a Changing World: challenges to the media, politics and accountability’ aims to prepare future leaders and opinion formers in South Asia for high responsibilities in their media organisations, by developing their analytical insights, strategic outlook and knowledge of key issues facing the South Asian Media. It is meant for high flying, mid-career journalists with a minimum of seven years of experience from the press and digital media who have the potential to become future media leaders and opinion formers. Funded by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, UK and hosted by the Department of Journalism and Mass Communication at the University of Westminster, London, it is for a duration of eight weeks in April and May 2012. Fourteen exceptional candidates — seven each from India and Pakistan will be selected for the programme. 
The scholarship covers the full programme fees, visa fee, return airfare and living expenses for the duration of the programme. One can apply online on or before February 10, 2012 at www.chevening.fco.gov.uk/CISPApplication/Intro.aspx

For further information, visit www.britishcouncil.org/india-scholarships-chevening-south_asia_journalism_programme.htm

Painting workshop

“Painting from Nature” a 2-day oil painting workshop is to be conducted on January 21 and 22, 2012, between 10.30 and to 4.30 pm, at Bangalore. Practicing artist Senthil Kumar has been invited to instruct students for the two days. The fees are Rs 3,500 which includes materials, lunch and tea. For further details contact: 98863 94195, 98861 53297.