Seeking employment after completing studies has now become passé, for students are now working part-time to gain experience in their area of interest. Media-related professions are especially popular among Bangalore students. 

ADVERTISEMENTSince these require only talent, which can’t be gained by taking up a particular course, students prefer to work part-time in the industry in order to get experience, which will help them to build their career.

Kishore Amruth, a student of Christ University, is a freelance photographer who hopes to become a professional in the field. “Photography is my passion as well as hobby. It is a medium to capture day-to-day life,” says Kishore, who is a BA second-year student. He works as a freelance photographer and has been in the field for close to two years. “I take off from college if I have any shoots. I just wish to be a photographer who deals with travel and nature,” he says.

Another budding photographer, Divin Devaiah, a student of engineering at Dayananda Sagar College of Engineering, is also an avid photographer. “I experiment a lot with my camera. It does allow me to think the way I want to,” says Divin. What initially began 
as a hobby has now turned into a full-time passion for Divin, who is fond of wildlife photography.

An engineering student, Najam Hassan, is interested in fashion co-ordinating and is currently balancing professional gigs as well as his classes. “I’ve been compering since my high school days and with appreciation from people, I boosted my performance and decided to become an emcee in the fashion industry,” he says.

A confident Najam says he has everything that is required of a compere. “I’ve realised my talent and potential. I will keep engineering as a back-up. In a way, I’ll fulfill my parents’ dream of me becoming an engineer and after that, I’ll pursue my dream — which is getting into the media industry,” he adds.

For Tanvi Sinha, an engineering student, singing is a stress-buster. She got into singing because of her mother. “I’ve been interested in singing for nearly seven years and have done many stage shows when I was in school. Now, in college, my professors encourage me to participate in singing competitions,” says Tanvi.

However, students maintain that their academics always trump these part-time jobs. Kishore says he never lets photography disturb his studies. “Studies remain top on my priority list. I keep aside photography when I have exams.”

Despite his shoots with private firms, Divin says that his passion has never interrupted his studies. “I never let photography interfere with my studies as education is more important to me,” says Divin.

Similarly, Najam says he sets aside all professional commitments when it comes to studies. “I start studying couple of months prior to the exams. I forget the rest of the world then and concentrate on my studies,” he says.

Tanvi says for the time being, she would like to focus on her studies rather than her music. “I want to graduate first and then will explore singing,” she concludes.