Milind Soman, an actor, host, a film producer, television show judge and the man who brought the term ‘supermodel’ into the modelling industry was recently in Delhi to support a clean and green environment. ADVERTISEMENTA popular face on Indian television in the ’90s the model-turned-actor says he is not getting any exciting roles to make a comeback on the idiot box.

“I am reading a lot of scripts and waiting for the right scripts which will excite me. Only then will I come back to television. I am doing movies, my last stint with the silver screen was Jodi Breakers. I am also doing a Marathi film which is still untitled.” 

Milind made his entry into the small screen with adventure series Sea Hawks and later became popular with his character on science fiction TV series Captain Vyom. He was last seen in the third season of the reality show Khatron Ke Khiladi.

But it was really modelling which had put Milind on the celebrity map. How did it happen? “It just happened by chance, you know. Somebody offered me an assignment decades ago to model for a product. That time I didn’t even know that it could be a career and that you get money for it.” 
The 46-year-old, who was also a national-level swimming champ, is currently busy with the 1, 500 km long marathon from Delhi to Mumbai as part of NDTV’s Greenathon campaign. 

The Green Run started as a 24-hour run in Greenathon’s first year, which then progressed to a 100-km run in the second year. The fit and fab Milind and his team took a huge leap for the third Greenathon by running over 550 km from Ahmedabad to Mumbai in 15 days. They have now set out for their longest run so far – 1,500 km in 30 days. During their journey, they will weave through Haryana, Rajasthan, Gujarat and finally end in Mumbai on May 20 at Yashraj Studios. “It is a fantastic concept. There is a lot to be done for the environment. We want to show people what they can do to save their environment. People should at least do one eco-friendly thing everyday and bring in small changes for the environment.” 

The fitness mantra for the ever so fit Milind is only running and no gymming. “I only run everyday. I don’t go to the gym or any yoga training. This is the way I keep myself fit and healthy.” Are the people of Delhi environment friendly? He says, “Only a few people are environment friendly. They want to contribute but do not know how they can.”

The actor will also participate in nature and wildlife-related activities such as tree planting and nature camps to spread the green message along the way of the campaign.

Milind will also use social networking sites to reach out to his fans and followers, as well as maintain a diary of his experiences all along the route.