Forty-four years ago when Patna Zoo was established, those who had conceived and designed it had not foreseen what problem could arise four decades later. It had a capacity to accommodate only 45 gharials (biological name: Gavialis gangeticus).

ADVERTISEMENT From 1969 to 2013, the number of gharials here has shown a quantum jump even though the endangered species is on decline throughout the country due to rising pollution and too much withdrawal of water from the mainstream rivers. But in the zoo, now renamed Sanjay Gandhi Biological Park, after the reptiles bred in captivity, its number has gone up to 107. 

Faced with the problem of plenty and the space crunch in the three enclosures designated for them, the mandarins of the Patna zoo and the State’s Forest 
Department are holding talks with the Dehradun-based Wildlife Institute of 
India (WII), who will help finalise how these gharials could be released in Gandak near the Valmikinagar Tiger Reserve so that they reclaim their natural habitat.

Gandak, a few decades back, was renowned to have this long-snouted species of the crocodile family which now figures in the critically endangered list of animals prepared by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). 

“We are in touch with WII officials who will finalise the protocols for their (gharials) introduction in their natural habitat. As a first step, we intend to 
release 15 of them in Gandak in December. This will be a first-of-its kind project in Bihar,” Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests and Chief Wildlife Warden BA Khan told Deccan Herald.

Park Director S Chandrashekhar too feels that it was getting increasingly difficult to keep 107 gharials due to space crunch here. “There are three enclosures. Over the years, these gharials have bred. As their numbers increased, we thought why not provide them an opportunity to reclaim their lost habitat. It was against this backdrop that we appr­oa­ched WII, who will help execute our plan,” Chandrashekhar said.

In the last couple of years, the burgeo­ning population of gharials has turned out to be a pain for zoo officials. In fact, one of Chandrashekhar’s predecessors Rakesh Kumar had written to the authorities of all the zoological parks in the country to take some gharials under mutual exchange programme. As a cons­equence, six gharials were shifted to Indira Gandhi Zoological Park in Vizag in Dece­mber 2006 and Patna zoo got bears under the plan. Later, Thiruvananthapuram zoo authorities evinced interest but as the gharials are Schedule 1 animals, a clearance from Central Zoo Authority (CZA) was awaited, which, however, could not fructify.

“If the authorities of other zoos are not prepared to part with their animals, we are even mulling over the idea to give them alligators for free,” Rakesh had then suggested and also written to the Ministry of Forest and Environment to allow him to release some alligators in the Gandak river near Valmikinagar Tiger Reserve.

But his move saw a feeble protest. Some conservationists were opposed to the proposal on the ground that these gharials might be hunted for skin, used for making leather bags and boots.

Today, zoo officials, however, pooh-pooh such apprehensions. “There is nothing wrong in releasing these reptiles in their natural habitat, where they can find food on their own,” argued Chandra- shekhar.

“The introduction of ghariyals in Gandak will be quite useful in providing us more information about their adaptability and movements during the winter. In the initial stage, we will release 15 of them. We will implant radio microchips, apart from tagging them with satellite transmitters. The plan to radio-tag is purely to monitor them,”Chandrashekhar told Deccan Herald. 

Now the ghariyals, which are to be released in the Gandak, have been kept in a pond at the zoo where they are being fed with several kilograms of fish. This is being done precisely because they need to develop this habit of catching their food as they have to do so in the natural habitat.

According to one estimate, the 100-odd small gharials, mostly one to three years of age, need around 50 kg fish twice a week. But some conservationists have expressed their apprehension that these ghariyals, when released in the Gandak, may not survive for long in the wild surroundings.

“We are doing this (release of ghariyals) as a first-of-its kind project. If it succeeds, fine. If not, we will review our decision,” averred the zoo official.