Gleaming, chrome glass-paneled structures which are sky-high do add a dash of colour and glamour to modern cities and are an unmistakable aspect of contemporary architecture. But not many of us realise that they are emerging as the second most potent threat to birdlife across the world, after habitat loss.

 This is stated to be causing the death of 98 million birds every year worldwide, according to the US Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) estimates. Another 40 to 50 million birds die because of collision against mobile phone and electric towers. Power lines and wind turbines (in that order) constitute the other lesser though highly fatal threat to birds. 

Research in Europe put the death of birds due to collision against glass panes at 2.5 lakh daily in Europe. 

The birds crash against huge window panes because reflective panes are not visible to them. They often mistake the green and leafy trees reflected in the shiny surfaces of these buildings to be real, and crash into them. 

During the night, birds are drawn to the artificial glow in the sky thanks to excessive night lighting. They flutter around the lights until they drop from exhaustion or collide into the buildings themselves. If they survive until daybreak, these birds find themselves trapped in a maze of reflective buildings and collide with the windows and reflective walls in an attempt to escape. 

Fatal Light Awareness Programme (FLAP), a migratory bird advocacy group, says that emission of reflective light is also a source of pollution that threatens to cause harm to avian life. It says that an individual cannot discharge a contaminant (in this case reflected light) if it causes an adverse effect (injures bird). This is the first time this provision has been argued this way.

According to Daniel Klem Jr., Professor of Biology at Muhlenberg College at Allentown in Pennsylvania puts the loss of birds worldwide to collisions into gleaming glass surfaces at one billion while adding that published annual estimates range from 100 million to one billion, 34 million annually in urban areas of the US and Canada alone. Klem explains, “An individual bird can be killed outright after leaving a perch and striking a window from as little as just over a meter away. Collision victims succumb from head trauma—brain swelling, intracranial pressure, cranial herniation, and breaking of the blood-brain barrier—and not from the often assumed “broken neck.”’ 

The best predictor of how many birds are killed at any one site is the density of birds in the immediate vicinity of windows because birds behave as if clear and tinted sheet glass surfaces are invisible to them. In North America, the largest tally of window collision victims have been recorded. In regions where organised monitoring programmes are established, the largest tally of birds falling prey is during spring and fall, which are migratory periods in the cities of Toronto, Chicago and New York. 

Klem who has carried out pioneering research on the subject and was appointed the first Sarkis Acopian Professor of Ornithology and Conservation Biology at the Muhlenberg College, suggests a few short-term and long-term measures to avert bird casualties. 
The steps suggested are as follows:

Hang a net of the type hung behind football goal posts in front of glass panels. (In India we mostly resort to this during troubled times when a procession is to pass through the route.) 

In new constructions or while replacing old glass panels, install the panes slightly out of the vertical, i.e., with an inclination in order that the reflection is downward.

Some amount of research has also been conducted by two European scientists Freidrich Buer and Dipl-Sozialw who suggest that the glass panes could be painted with ultra-violet patterns with a bird pen. These ultra-violet patterns are invisible to human eye but are detected by birds. These markings have a six-month durability. 

An alternative measure is sticking the glass panes with bird-stickers that are invisible to the human eye, but are visible to birds. 
ADVERTISEMENT