St Joseph’s Boys Hostel will turn a time capsule for over 120 alumni, including 93-year-old C M Madappa, who will descend on the campus this weekend to relive their memories.

“The stone building of the hostel, which once dominated the surroundings, is now tucked between huge structures as things have changed for the better. But one step inside, we go back in time,” said entrepreneur Ephraim John Joseph, a 1979-82 batch student who is coordinating the three-day MayFest-2017 set to begin from May 19.

The senior-most of all is Madappa, who was in the hostel during 1943-45. Madappa has settled down in Madikeri after a career with Nilgiris plantation. “What is now Catholic Club was part of the hostel then. On rotation, each student would be assigned chores like bringing provisions from Russell Market and keeping accounts of the kitchen store. These were things we used to do with pride,” he said.

Madappa said the hostel also opened a window to the world. “We had hostel mates who were too spirited to sit in a corner and those were the times when a walk in Bengaluru would help us see half of the world. There were American and British soldiers on the streets and then Italian prisoners of war. The hostel life gave us friends who helped us deal with the world outside,” he said.

Benny Augustine, who studied BA (Arts) and now works as a Human Resources director in an IT company, noted that there were some ‘break the rules’ moments but they never crossed the limits. 

“The warden would retire to his room around 10 pm and some of us would assemble in the courtyard. Then the discussions would start. From arts and politics to philosophy, we would talk things till morning,” the 1987-92 batch student said. For Kishore Shetty, the hostel laid the foundation for what was to become his best quality. “In 1977, I was the first hostelite, along with another student, to be elected to the college union. This unique opportunity built my confidence as a leader,” he said.

Joseph said many alumni who are in the public domain, including Public Information Bureau Director General Frank Noronha, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) Anur Reddy and Brigadier Bansi Ponnappa, are expected to participate in the event.ADVERTISEMENT