A study conducted by Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) on Bangalore lakes shows that water is highly polluted in all these water bodies, though they have sewage treatment plants.

ADVERTISEMENTThe KSPCB is writing to the custodians of lakes to take note of this and clean them up. The letter, dated May 29 and signed by KSPCB Member Secretary, will be sent to Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike, Bangalore Development Authority, Lake Development Authority and Forest Department. These custodians are being directed to improve quality of lake water under their jurisdiction. 

According to the latest study report, available with Deccan Herald, water in none of the lakes is suitable for consumption even after treatment. The quality of lakes is also very bad. 

KSPCB conducted a survey of 48 lakes from April- December, 2013. A month-wise analysis of lake water quality was also done. The quality was based on five parameters created by Central Pollution Control Board, which explains the best designated use. The categories are: A- Drinking water source without conventional treatment but after disinfection, B- Outdoor bathing (organised), C- Drinking water source with conventional treatment followed by disinfection, D- Propagation of wildlife and fisheries, and E- Irrigation, industrial cooling and controlled waste disposal. 

A senior KSPCB official said, as per the report, water in all lakes is not fit for consumption by humans and animals, despite installation of sewage treatment plants. Lakes are not maintained and the water quality is not monitored. All are in bad condition, but the worst are Agara, Puttenahalli, Begur, Chinnappanahalli, Madiwala, Shivapura to name a few. 

Other lakes in bad state

Kammasandra, Bommasandra, Chandapura, Rayasandra, Hebbagodi, Sankey Tank, Yellamallappa, Doddanekundi, Mahadevapura, Seetharamapalya, Chinnappanahalli, Kundalahalli, KR Puram, Sadaramangala, Nallurhalli, Varthur, Tubarahalli (Sidddapura), Pattandhur Agrahara, Rampura, Hoodi Giddana, Bhattarahalli, Madiwala, Parappana Agrhara, Somasundarapalya, Agara, Kalena Agrahara, Ibblur, Hullimavu, Singasandra, Begur, Haralakunte, Devarabisanahalli, Kaikondanahalli, Kasavanahalli, Bellandur, Kudlu, Yediyur, Lalbagh, Hebbal, Jakkur, Puttenahalli, Singapura, Yelahanka, Byrasandra, Ulsoor, Kaggadasapura, Karihobanahalli and Shivapura.