The recent rejection of a request of the defence ministry by the Union environment ministry to allow setting up of a radar in Narcondum Island in the Andaman Sea raises the question of whether in this country security of the nation is of paramount importance or whether the environmental issues can override it. It becomes all the more important when we see total abdication of issues of environmental abuse by the government.

 However, so far the debate has been between environment and industrial growth but now the debate has moved to a more serious issue of environment and national security which is a matter of greater concern. 

That there is large scale violation of environment in this country is a known fact. The ministry of environment is either conniving or watching helplessly, whichever way the reader wants to accept it. The mining mafia, supported by political-bureaucratic nexus is indulging in the rape of forests violating all forms of environment laws and hardly any action is being taken against any individual or company. Some activists with conviction have fought cases against the mining mafia and inaction of government and in some cases got favourable judgements.

The pollution control agencies responsible for the welfare of various rivers are a scandal. Yamuna and Ganga River Control Authorities have spent thousands of crores for cleaning up rivers with pollution in them only getting worse. This state of affairs has no justification when we see that in other democratic countries like England where river Thames at London, which was once so polluted that no fish could survive, has now become a pollution free river. Similar is the case with many rivers all over the world. Why is it that we are unable to control such an environment disaster? The simple answer is corruption. Corruption has seeped into the innards of our bureaucratic system and every aspect of bureaucracy needs a deep cleansing.

After having succumbed to all sorts of environmental scams, the ministry of environment in its effort they feel very elated when they recently denied the Indian Navy/Coast Guard to put up radars at Narcondom Island of the Andaman archipelago in the Bay of Bengal. A look at the map of Andaman Islands in the atlas will convince any lay person the critical importance of having a radar in this crucial and isolated island which juts out 160 km of the Andaman archipelago facing Myanmar. 

Benefit wildlife

A large number of ships pass by on their way to Malacca Straits. With security concerns rising it is most necessary to have a radar in this island. Further, such a radar will help Coast Guards identify poachers in our Exclusive Economic Zone and thereby benefit wildlife by keeping the poachers at Bay. There is a small population of Hornbill birds, estimated to be about 350, which lives on this island. This bird has been declared endangered species under schedule 1 of Wildlife Protection Act of 1972. 

Hornbills are found in many parts of India and the world and live with human beings in harmony. In fact a former chief commissioner of Andaman and Nicobar Islands even had a pet Hornbill living in open condition in his house in Port Blair. In 1991 when I got posted to Port Blair the chief commissioner introduced me to his pet Hornbill and I put my hand out into his long beak by way of handshake. Therefore, while Narcondom Hornbill may be an endangered species, there is no reason to believe that with a radar and a silent generator will lead to their extermination. Most probably, the Narcondam Hornbill will adjust to the new environment.

Be that as it may, the refusal of ministry of environment with total silence of the PMO or the Cabinet Committee on Security to allow setting up of a radar in the Narcondom island along with a generator is not only baffling but downright anti-national. The fact that Hornbill population may be disturbed is neither an established fact nor is it likely that they will not adjust to the radar equipment. Nature enthusiasts will, of course, raise a hue and cry like the Nature Foundation or Bombay Natural History Society and they will as they have no responsibility towards national security issues. However, the government is responsible to take all views into account and come to a decision which is in overall interests of the nation.

The ministry of environment has abdicated its role in environment protection where business interests clash but they are showing extreme sensitivity in their role as protectors in this particular case   causing  damage to national security. The role of the prime minister as an arbiter, however, comes into question. He cannot abdicate his role once again like he did in 2G or coal scam. He cannot even take refuge of ‘coalition dharma’ as he did in 2G scam as in this case the ministry of environment is with his party. 
His role  as the first amongst equals now comes into play. With no response coming from the PMO we are left with the feeling that while protection of the Narcondum Hornbill is paramount,  the issues of national security can best be left on ‘ram bharose’ as has been the practice in the past.

(The writer is a former chief secretary of Andaman and Nicobar Islands)ADVERTISEMENT