At almost 19 degrees Celsius below the freezing point, Leh town in the Ladakh region on Sunday recorded the lowest temperature of the season in Jammu and Kashmir. The night temperatures in Kashmir also remained several notches below the freezing point.

ADVERTISEMENT“The minimum temperature was minus 18.9 degrees Celsius in Leh town today (early Sunday morning), which is the lowest recorded in any town of Jammu and Kashmir this season so far,” Met Office director Sonam Lotus said here.

“In the Kargil town of Ladakh region, the lowest was minus 16.6 while it was minus 12.4 in Pahalgam and minus 10.8 in Gulmarg,” Lotus said. “Jammu city recorded a minimum of 5.9 degrees, which is a degree below normal.”

The official said weather would remain dry across the state during the next 12 hours.

Meanwhile, most water bodies in the state that serve as winter homes for the migratory birds have frozen and the birds are reported to be moving out to the unfrozen areas of Wullar Lake to find food during these days.

The local wildlife protection department is organising artificial feed for thousands of migratory birds from Siberia and Tibet that flock the region during the harsh winter in northern regions.

The snowfall in J&K had the state cut off from the rest of the country as cold in northern India intensified. Cold weather in Uttar Pradesh claimed nine lives. 

Four people in the state died due to cold and rainfall in different parts of Fatehpur district while a road accident caused by poor visibility due to fog killed five others in Hathras on Saturday night.

Although Dellhites woke up to a foggy morning, they were treated to bright sunshine in the later part of the day with the maximum settling at 18.2 degrees, two notches below normal. The minimum in the national capital was recorded at 6.3 degrees, one notch below normal.

In Jammu and Kashmir, Srinagar-Jammu National Highway, the only all-weather road connecting the Valley to the rest of the country, was on Saturday night closed following fresh snowfall.

The highway had been opened to traffic Saturday morning after two days following its closure due to snowfall on Wednesday.