Owing to the fear of tigers, labourers have called off their work at various coffee plantations in the villages of Southern Kodagu.ADVERTISEMENTPanic prevails after three labourers succumbed to tiger attacks in the past 15 days. It is said that the tigers have been roaming in the limits of more than 10 villages in Southern Kodagu.The tiger attacks have taken place at a time when pepper is to be harvested. However, workers are afraid to come out of their houses and the planters fear a loss of crop.Pepper, if not harvested at the right time, will wither-off from the plants.A grower said that the coffee plant pruning also needs to be done before the monsoon.Earlier, there was a problem of labourer shortage. Now, the rest of the labourers too are in distress and are not able to turn up for work.K Harish, a planter from Teralu village, said that the coffee planters, who were fed up with wild elephant menace, are now worried about the tiger menace.Many planters are thinking of giving up agriculture. People are afraid to go out after evenings.The lives of labourers have become miserable. Parents do not have the courage to send their children to schools and colleges.Plantation worker Appu said that he had come to Kodagu along with his family to make a living. If he loses his life, what about his wife and children, he asks.More tigers?Villagers speculate that there are a minimum of five tigers roaming around in the region. Attacks are taking place in areas that are spread far and wide.For instance, if a tiger attacks a person in Manchalli, the next day, another attack takes place in an area that is around 20 km away. The forest department needs to step up its operations, they said.Agriculturists in Southern Kodagu used to carry out dairy farming as well. But, as the tiger has killed a lot of cows in the villages near Maldare forest, the farmers in the region have stopped rearing cows.Agriculturist Mandaiah said that the cattle owners are not able to sell their cattle, because of amendments to Karnataka Prevention of Slaughter and Preservation of Cattle (Transportation of cattle) Rules 2021.Forest Department Office surroundedProtestors led by Rajya Raitha Sangha district unit blocked the road near Mattigodu wildlife division forest office after taking out a vehicle rally from Kanuru Circle.They also vented their ire against the forest department officials, by surrounding the office.A dharna by residents at Bellur village has continued.