Veteran howdah carrier, Balarama, who has retired from duty as the lead elephant, is likely to be pulled out of the Dasara procession, too. 

ADVERTISEMENTWith just two days left for the Jamboo Savari, Forest department officials in charge of the Dasara elephants have more or less decided not to use Balarama in the procession. The 55-year-old elephant, which has carried the golden howdah 13 times, is said to be “suffering from a phobia”, as a result of which he has been disobeying even his mahout’s commands. 

Four elephants — Arjuna, Balarama, Gajendra, and Abhimanyu — are being given turns to lead the troupe of 12 elephants during the practice walk every day along the Jamboo Savari route. 

On the days that Balarama led the elephants, he is said to have abruptly halted at RMC Circle and tried to go back. No amount of coaxing and prodding by the handlers could convince him to proceed to finish the remainder of the journey. Balarama behaved similarly almost every time he has been made to carry the load of sand bags. The elephants are made to walk the 4.5-km stretch from Amba Vilas Palace to Bannimantap, via Chamaraja Circle, K R Circle and Sayyaji Rao Road. 

A collective decision on whether or not to keep Balarama in the procession will be taken on Sunday, according to DCF (Wildlife), Mysore S N Devaraj. 

“We don’t want to take any independent decision on the matter, as it can be misconstrued as politicking. A collective decision on Balarama will be taken on Sunday when all mahouts, officials and veterinarians will be present,” Devaraj said. “But it’s a fact that we cannot keeping him in the procession, as his behaviour has become unpredictable.” 

Troubled jumbo

Devaraj further said the elephant had been “ill treated and neglected” by Thimma, his mahout. “Every year after Dasara, the elephants are completely neglected by the mahouts. Thimma has not been taking care of Balarama at all. The elephant was even attacked by a wild tusker recently. All these factors have had an impact on the animal. It seems he has developed a phobia,” Devaraj explained. 

Balarama, a resident of Thithimathi, was captured in 1987 at Kattepura forest in Kodagu. The elephant, which suffers from cataract, showed signs of irritability and fatigue two Dasaras ago, forcing the department to replace him with Arjuna. While carrying the howdah once, Balarama’s legs had buckled and he tried to sit down in the middle of the procession. 

When asked about the welfare of the animal, Devaraj said it was the duty of the officials under whose jurisdiction the elephant comes. “We are just in charge of the elephants during Dasara. The elephants have to be taken care of at the camps where they come from,” he added.