She has a few sobriquets and they are well deserved ones. Among other names, Rasila Vadher is called Lion Queen of India and Cat Woman. The 30-something forest rescue guard has been featured among others by the Discovery channel and BBC.

ADVERTISEMENT“I love my work and it involves risk as I rescue animals, but it gives me immense pleasure and satisfaction,” says the lion-hearted Rasilaben, who works in the Gir National Park and Wildlife Sanctuary in Gujarat. 

So far, the lean-built woman has rescued lions 200 times, leopards 500 times and crocodiles and snakes, including pythons and cobras, some 1,000 times. By any standard, in numerical terms and also skill- wise, there is no one close to her.

“It’s my job and I do it with dedication and professionally and ensure that there is no harm to the flora and fauna. Moreover, what is more important is that it is team work,” Rasila told Deccan Herald after receiving the Wildlife Service Award instituted by Sanctuary Asia magazine.

The Sanctuary citation states: “Forester Rasila Vadher’s legendary exploits could fill a book. The leader of the department’s wildlife rescue division, the fearless Vadher has plunged into the depths of a well to rescue a leopard, tranquilised lions from seemingly impossible angles, smoothly shifted venomous snakes from inside houses, and participated in over 800 successful rescue operations. Completely at ease in the forest, intensely committed to the protection of wildlife, she stands strong in the face of danger…and then subdues it.”

“The work that Rasila is doing is something unmatched,” says veteran naturalist and conservationist Bittu Sahgal, the founder-editor of Sanctuary Asia. Smilingly, she adds: “This is a job where I get paid to be within the cradle of nature.  Not many are very fortunate to get such a job. Besides, there is a constant learning process and we get to know new things more and more on a regular basis.”

She joined the Forest department in 2007-08, when a friend told her about the recruitment drive and she presented herself at their doorstep.

“My father died very early. I was a graduate and needed a job to support by mother and brother. Since I had taken part in a lot of sports activities, I was physically fit,” she said. “Though I was desperately looking for a job for a living, this one was by choice and not by compulsion,” she added. 

“Ours is the first such women forest guard company and we have received proper training. I guess the girls in our area have taken inspiration from our group and started applying for this job,” she says. The unit was set up when the then Gujarat Chief Minister Narendra Modi ordered a 33 per cent quota for women in Gir. The candidates have to go through various levels of aptitude and physical examinations to quality for the post.

 “Our batch comprised 43 women,” she said. “When I joined, practically I knew nothing about wildlife or Gir….but I was determined…I wanted to be a working woman,” says the in-charge of Gir’s rescue team.  

 Her village Bhanduri is on the periphery of her workplace around 42 km away – but the nature of her job is such that she is required to stay at Sasan Gir in the forest quarters. Whenever she gets time – almost once or twice a month – she meets her mother and brother. “Our family shares a unique bond,” she said. Her mother and brother are aware of the nature of the job. “We have faced hardships in life at some point of time and hence I do not fear anything and more importantly, I love my job.”

She said: “As per the latest count, we have 523 lions. We live with the majestic Asiatic lions, but we never feel unsafe…they never attack us….we  can even identify them and their areas….this has come with experience. When I had joined, I was totally clueless what has to be done, but now, that is not so.”

 She recalled her first major encounter with lion in the open on May 18, 2008. The task was to remove a porcupine’s spine from a lioness. “When we spotted the lioness, we decided against tranquilizing to capture her, as she was too weak.  We first tried to set cattle as a bait which she tried to snatch. This also attracted a healthy lioness and a cub. So we decided to leave the spot to try later,” she said. As they were retreating, the lioness roared. 

  “To ensure our safety, the senior forest guards hit their sticks on the ground to make sound. In the confusion, one of them hit my head and I started bleeding. I knew if I returned, I am out of it.  So, I decided against the advice of the doctor and stayed back. By morning, we were able to cage her….this was a big experience and my confidence increased,” she said.  

 “We have to take on-the-spot decisions, whether to use tranquilizer darts or set cages…the sole purpose is that the animal in distress must be helped and its safety is important. In 2011, I had to pull out a leopard from a well in the night. We lowered a ladder, but the animal started chewing the ropes, it took us almost three hours and we managed to rescue it,” she said.

 On the nature of work, Rasila said: “It is 24x7 job….we are ready always and we move in a matter of  minutes in case of an emergency. There is no set formula for work….we get calls like leopard entering villages, lions in distress, wild animals falling in wells, snakes entering homes and godowns. We have to respond to all kinds of situation and no two situations are identical. Besides, if there is an emergency in a village, crowd control is a problem and onlookers enter danger areas, particularly in situations of human-animal conflict.”

 Rasila said: “I promote nature, I promote responsible tourism, I am helping NGOs. I am also helping out senior officers, including those from the Indian Forest Service,” she said.
 “The job is not only about rescue, it’s about nursing them to ensure that they are back and then releasing them…it sounds easy on paper but it is not that easy,” adds Rasila.

Once the forest area of Gir was the hunting ground of the Nawabs of Junagadh but today it is well-protected the only home to Asiatic Lions. Gir has 2,375 distinct fauna species, 38 species of mammals, around 300 species of birds, 37 species of reptiles and over 2,000 species of insects.