Despite intervention by the police and the forest department, illegal quarrying, extraction and transportation of sand and stones continue to threaten animals in the Bannerghatta National Park. 

ADVERTISEMENTAfter their meeting with Home Minister G Parameshwara yielded no results, angry locals started an online campaign to impress upon the government to stop the illegal activities. 

A petition, posted on Change.Org to highlight illegal mining and transportation of minerals in BNP and its vicinity, has gained over 396 hits in just two days. Vishnu Narain, one of the petitioners said that the online petition has been launched to inform people about the “lackadaisical attitude” of the state government towards the pristine forest patch, just next to Bengaluru. Narain said there was a need to garner support to stop mining, blasting and quarrying. 

The areas of BNP, spread across 270 sq km are under immense pressure as blasting, quarrying and extraction of sand and stones have been rampant in the hillocks on the fringes of the park. While the mined granite and sand are being transported illegally through BNP road, trucks carrying over 3,000 to 4,000 loads of sand and stones pass through Shivanahalli-Ragihalli Road, BNP-Kagallipura Road, Mahantalingapura, Anekal, Kannakapura and Bannerghatta road.

Though forest department officials have seized trucks and penalised offenders, trucks continue to pass through the forest patch at night. This poses a threat to animals, especially elephants, as the roads and quarrying sites abut the elephant corridor. 

The locals on Monday held a meeting with the home minister but returned disappointed. “He sent us away saying that he cannot do anything unless the chief minister intervenes. So we are calling for support online to catch the government’s attention,” said Suresh, a local and another petitioner. The online activists are also planning to file a contempt petition in the High Court. According to  the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, and High Court orders, no quarrying, sand mining or excavation is permitted within a radius of one kilometre of the forest patch.