Jagara Valley, also called Muthodi, is a biodiversity hotspot located in the picturesque Chikkamagaluru district. It was an independent sanctuary (as Jagara Valley Game Reserve) until it was merged with the Bhadra Wildlife Sanctuary in 1974.

The bowl-shaped terrain is mostly covered by moist deciduous and evergreen forests. The hillocks are clothed by the green grasslands and the evergreen sholas. It is perennially wet due to a web of innumerable little streams and rivulets like Somavahini, Thadabehalla, Odirayanahalla.

Teak, rosewood, honne, karimatti, holematti, hebbalasu and suragi are some of the commonly found trees here. Various types of climbers can also be found in the valley. The huge twining aneballi, the water-yielding neerballi and the shigeballi that yields shampoo pods are the most common climbers seen here. Apart from this, the region also houses various kinds of bamboos. Dowga, the elephants’ favourite food; medri, useful for bamboo weavers; chiwa, the base of the police lathi; and wate, used in making flutes, are amply available. The dowga bamboo profusely flowered during 2002-2003 and died en masse all over (it flowers once in 75 years and dies en masse). However, this variety has regenerated and is reclaiming its habitat now. 

The Jagara Valley has varied populations of Western Ghats mammals. Amongst them, tigers are the main attraction, followed by panthers, elephants, Indian bison, sambar deer, spotted deer, barking deer, wild dog, langur and bonnet macaque. One can catch glimpses of the brilliant-coloured Malabar giant squirrel and the nocturnal giant flying squirrel as well. 

Jagara is a paradise for birdwatchers and ornithologists. More than 250 bird species have been recorded here. The forest reooled that there are humans around. It may, in fact, verberates with rich musical calls of birds. If one hears the sound of whistling, don’t get fbe the bird Malabar whistling thrush that is calling its mate. The other interesting bird found here is the white-rumped shama, which is a song bird.

One can also spot birds like black-naped blue flycatcher, paradise flycatcher, yellow-browed bulbul, black-crested bulbul, blue-throated blue flycatcher, dark-fronted babbler, Indian peafowl, grey junglefowl, white-bellied treepie, grey-headed fish eagle, changeable hawk-eagle, crested serpent eagle. 

One can see a variety of reptiles including over 30 species of snakes, marsh crocodiles, monitor lizards, flying lizards, common garden lizards, Indian chameleon, skinks and geckos. Additionally, one can see many species of frogs and hundreds of butterflies here.

Planning a trip

Across the valley, nature trails have been developed to enable trekkers to enjoy the rich landscape and biodiversity of the region. If one wants to go deep into the forest to view wildlife, departmental vehicles are available for hire.

The best time to visit the valley is between October and May. One may have to take the permission from the Forest Department before venturing into the forests. If you are looking forstay, there are dormitories, tents and a Forest Department guest house in Muthodi.
ADVERTISEMENT