With Independence Day falling on a Monday, many are planning to make use of the extended weekend for taking a short vacation, and several online travel portals are offering packages for offbeat destinations like Himachal Pradesh’s Khajjiar and 
Rajasthan’s Osian.

ADVERTISEMENT “The trend of taking frequent breaks on long weekends has been growing over the past few years as people look for a quick and short respite from the hustle-bustle of their hectic lives. An extended weekend amidst their daily schedule certainly comes as a boon for all,” Sharat Dhall, president, Yatra.com, tells Metrolife.

According to travel portals, the frenzy around long weekends is fast catching up with various new destinations making it to the list without burning a hole in the pocket. 

While places like Goa, Manali, Jim Corbett and McLeod Ganj are evergreen popular destinations for a two nights-three days’ stay, online travel portals are offering trips to lesser-known destinations within an economical range of Rs 5,000 to Rs 6,000. 

“Such short trips are practical and economical, and do not require tedious planning. They provide instant gratification too. With the upcoming weekend, we have decided to offer our travellers numerous weekend getaway options. These include the likes of Himachal Pradesh’s Tirthan Valley trip at Rs 5,999 per person,” says Kunal Mathur, project strategist, new initiatives, TravelTriangle. 

The long weekend further extends to Raksha Bandhan falling on August 18, which makes it a nine-day long break for a quick retreat.

“For the nine-day vacation, we thought of this experimental trip to the Spiti Valley and wanted to see if people will be up for it. It was surprising for us to see the tickets sold out!” adds Mathur.
Added to the list are other offbeat destinations like Rajasthan’s Dholpur and Ramathra.

“Whether you prefer to stay home and take in the Ramathra Fort’s tranquil atmosphere, or wish to explore its many natural sites, the place which is 392 kms from Delhi offers a memorable stay,” says Aniket Das, destination manager, Indian Routes.  

“If you don’t want to go too far, there are enough interesting options around Delhi NCR as well. You could club them and cover two or three places either by rail or road. From heritage sites to nature and wildlife, there is a lot to choose from without spending much,” mentions Kapil Goswamy, managing director and founder, BigBreaks.com. 

 “For instance, you can cover Jodhpur and Osian on your way back to Delhi. While Jodhpur is a quintessential historic town with a magnificent fort guarding it, Osian is a small heritage place. It’s a wonderful spot for an architectural outing and a desert safari. A sleepover in the sands can be the grand finale of your wonderful break,” adds Goswamy.