Union Environment Minister Prakash Javadekar has come off as a person with a wrong and unsound view of the reach and remit of his office in his exchanges with Women and Child Welfare Minister Maneka Gandhi over culling of animals. He also does not seem to be fully aware of its responsibilities. Maneka has charged the ministry with “lust for killing” for its drive to shoot wild animals in various states. Javadekar’s defence is inadequate and unconvincing. He says culling has been ordered because animals have encroached into human territory and state governments have asked for it. He has also said that culling is part of the scientific management of environment and is entirely legal. He seems to have only a human-centric idea of environment. But his ministry has a wider reach and covers animals and forests too. Their well-being should also be his concern.

The ministry has declared nilgais in Bihar, wild boars in Uttarakhand and monkeys in Himachal Pradesh ‘vermin’ because they have destroyed crops or pose other threats. Peacocks in Goa also face the threat of culling. But the problem is more with human beings than with animals. If man-animal conflicts are increasing it is because animal habitats are being encroached upon by human beings. Animals leave their habitats in search of food or water because of the shrinking or degradation of their habitats. They do not enjoy visiting villages and towns, and do not kill for their sport. Javadekar says 500 people are killed by animals every year. But none of the animals which are under orders to be shot now is a killer. The animals’ territory should be left to them. It is the environment ministry’s responsibility to ensure this. Then they won’t trouble human beings or mess with their properties.

Javadekar says killing animals is legal. But we made the laws which sanction the killings. It should also be noted that the Wildlife Protection Act which allows killing was passed in 1972. More than 50% of the country’s wildlife has disapp-eared since then and so the assumptions and prescriptions of the Act need to be reviewed now. There is a more inclusive and comprehensive view of the environment now, which Javadekar has not grasped. There are several ways of managing and reducing man-animal conflict, like erecting fences and relocating animals, which have been tried with success in many places. Killings should not be the norm, except in the case of man-eaters and to prevent the spread of diseases. They do not end the conflict but only reduce the animals’ numbers and diminish the environment.

ADVERTISEMENT