Violent protests in north Karnataka and the bandh observed in most parts of the state, including Bengaluru, in the wake of the Mahadayi Water Disputes Tribunal rejecting the state’s plea for interim relief, indicate how sensitive and emotional the issue has become as rising scarcity of water leaves people more and more desperate. The farmers have been agitating for over a year demanding speedy implementation of Kalasa-Banduri project, and if only the tribunal had taken a reasonable view of Karnataka’s request for utilising 7.56 tmcft of water for drinking and irrigation purposes in the Malaprabha basin area, the fire would have been doused at least temporarily. The drinking water situation is so acute in the twin cities of Hubballi-Dharwad and the districts of Belagavi and Gadag that they get scant supplies once in 15-20 days. Even the United Nations has recognised the right to water and sanitation as a human right “indispensable for leading a life of human dignity” and holds that it is a prerequisite for the realisation of other human rights.

That being the case, instead of taking a humanitarian view of the problem, the tribunal, unfortunately, has chosen to find loopholes in Karnataka’s application for interim relief. The tribunal ignored the fact that Kalasa-Banduri project had been cleared by the Centre in 2002 and the National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (Neeri) had in its report discounted Goa’s apprehension that the project would damage the ecology, before it was halted midway by the UPA government. The tribunal said Karnataka had failed to establish that surplus water was available at three points from which water would be transferred to the Malaprabha basin. It also concluded that such a transfer would be ecologically damaging and would upset the ‘natural equilibrium’ of the Mahadayi river. The tribunal faulted the Karnataka government for not obtaining environmental and wildlife clearances for execution of the project.

However, this is not the time to dissect whether the Karnataka government ‘bungled’ by taking a political decision against legal advice to seek an interim relief, especially since the tribunal is expected to submit its final report in about a year’s time. A favourable order by the tribunal would have considerably eased the situation. Of course, not everything is lost and being an upper riparian state, Karnataka has every right to believe that the state’s just demands for water will not be ignored by the tribunal in its final order. The Opposition parties, instead of playing politics, should join hands with the government in ensuring that Karnataka’s rights in the Mahadayi dispute are protected. Nothing prevents the two states from resolving the issue through talks even at this stage and the BJP should prevail upon the prime minister to arrange a dialogue between Karnataka and Goa.