The animals will comes as a gift from Israel to the city

The Sri Chamarajendra Zoological Gardens will soon have new guests from Israel - four zebras from Ramat Gan Safari, Tele Aviv, which is gifting the equines to the Zoo. The animals are expected to reach the Zoo by end of April or first week of May.

“The Israel zoo has agreed give two pairs of female zebras. They are waiting for a proper logistic facility to transport them from Israel to Mysore,” said B P Ravi, Executive Director, Mysore Zoo.

The Central Zoo Authority of India (CZA), New Delhi, had given approval to procure the zebras from Israel.

Gift

Ravi said that the lone zebra (25 years) housed in the Zoo was growing old, and the Zoo wanted to introduce a new bloodline. “So we approached Israel zoo, and they had agreed to gift us the zebras,” he added. 

The Ramat Gan Safari is a world-renowned animal breeding conservation programme and it is a world leader in zebra exports. It has also donated other animals throughout the world to help bolster breeding populations.

Earlier there were four zebras in Mysore Zoo — two were brought from Chennai, and two others from Leipzig Zoo, Germany. While two died due to formation of stones in the gall bladder, the third zebra died because of age factor.

The process for bringing animals from foreign country includes, No Objection Certificate (NOC) from Ministry of Environment and Forest (MoEF). Once approved, Mysore Zoo has to apply for permit from the Directorate General of Foreign Trade and get clearance from the Deputy Director of Wildlife Preservation (Southern region), based in Chennai.Ravi also said that he had approached Sanjay Gandhi Biological Park in Patna, Bihar, to bring in a Rhinoceros to Mysore.

Gift to Delhi

A couple of weeks ago, Mysore Zoo gifted pair of Indian gaur, black swans and male tigers to National Zoological Park in Delhi, in a bid to help revamp the Zoo ahead of the World Association of Zoos and Aquariums (WAZA) conference to be held this year. 

The conference is being held for the first time in India, which will be attended by zoo directors from across the world, who will make presentations of several case studies of zoos in India.ADVERTISEMENT