Worried about the sloth bears of Daroji Bear Sanctuary in Hospet taluk of Bellary losing their natural characteristics due to the present feeding practice, the State Forest Department has sought an opinion from the Wildlife Institute of India (WII) on whether it can stop the two-decade-old practice. 

However, WII has reportedly suggested not to do so as it might trigger a man-animal conflict in the region.

The forest department has been feeding the bears of Daroji Sanctuary since it was established in the early 90s. The Principal Chief Conservator of Forests and Chief Wildlife Warden, B K Singh, has sought the opinion of WII on whether they can give up the practice. 

In a letter dated September 20, 2011, addressed to Director, WII, Singh has said that the feeding practice has made the animals more dependent. “Providing food to the sloth bears in the sanctuary is unnatural and makes them dependent. 

Therefore, we propose to phase out the feeding practice,” the letter says. “This has been on our mind for quite some time. Continuing this practice is not feasible in the long run,” Singh told Deccan Herald. The sanctuary, considered Asia’s first sloth bear sanctuary, was established in 1994 in the eastern plains of Karnataka. 

The State government declared 5,587.30 hectares (84 sq km) of Bilikallu reserve forest as Daroji Bear Sanctuary.

The sanctuary, a result of the efforts by senior Congress leader and wildlife photographer M Y Ghorpade, houses about 120 sloth bears. Other animals and birds like leopards, hyenas, jackals, wild boars, porcupines, pangolins, star tortoises, monitor lizards, mongooses, pea fowl, partridges, painted Spur Hens and Quail dwell here. About 90 species of birds and 27 species of butterflies have been identified in this sanctuary in a preliminary survey. 

The department started feeding the sloth bears with jaggery, molasses and fruits in 1994. However, since 2002-2003, the department began feeding the bears with maize and other grains cooked with jaggery at a designated spot, so that tourists get a chance to sight the bears which come to feed on the preparation. The practice continues even today, but the department feels it is time to stop it.

Following the letter by the State Forest Department, WII officials have orally indicated that the feeding should not be stopped now, as this will result in man-animal conflict. “We have been told that if the feeding is stopped, all the bears will have to be shifted to the rescue centre,” said an official source.

However, the department is awaiting official communication in this regard. A group of wildlife enthusiasts too has advocated the need to continue the feeding. 

The feeding takes place at Karadi Kalgudda, a place within the sanctuary, and not throughout the 84-sq km area. Very few bears come here for food,” said K S Abdul Samad, a wildlife enthusiast. The wildlife lovers have suggested the department not to feed the sloth bears cooked food, but natural foods like fruits.ADVERTISEMENT