Experts at a meeting in the Ministry of Environment and Forest (MoEF) in New Delhi have rejected the State government’s plan to translocate elephants as not feasible. 

ADVERTISEMENTGoing by the minutes of the meeting dated December 15, 2011, chaired by Jagadish Kishwan, ADG, wildlife, MoEF, experts comprising Dr Raman Sukumaran,Dr Ajay A Desai, Dr Divya Mudappa, Dr P S Easa have opined that the translocation is not a feasible option and suggested that a detailed study be taken up before initiating any such measures.

Dr Raman Sukumaran, Chairman, Centre for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Sciences (IISc), stressed the need to contemplate information pertaining to the composition of the elephant herd and how long these elephants have been occupying the forest patch before taking any measures for resolving the man-elephant conflict.
 
High concentration

Elephants, which are habitual crop-raiders, will create problem at the relocation site as well, he said. Sukumaran said 90-95 per cent of the elephant population is concentrated in the forests of south Karnataka and about 10 per cent near Hassan.
There would be a need for preparing a larger landscape and shifting them close to Tamil Nadu border may create problems in Hosur, the minutes stated. 

Dr Ajay Desai, another expert, from WWF, who had earlier advocated translocation, during the meeting said efforts were made earlier to translocate elephants from Kattepura in 1980s, “Elephants in the area have a home range in excess of 600 sq km, hence, they know the entire terrain and it is easy for them to find their way back,” he said as per the minutes.

Explaining the problem at Hassan, he said the small forest patch of 600 hectares has been divided into two patches of about 250 hectare area (ha) and 350 ha. Desai said no study of the population and its movement has been done since the translocation was carried out.

Dr P S Easa, member, Project Elephant Steering Committee and Elephant Task Force, agreeing with Dr Desai, said there was a need to ascertain whether the elephants in the herd are habitual crop-raiders. If yes, they may create problem at the areas they are translocated.

Consult people

Dr Divya Mudappa suggested that the local people at the place where the jumbos are being translocated should be consulted. The meeting resolved that the MoEF needs to set up a task force consisting of persons with experiential knowledge, for studying the composition of elephant herd in Kattepura and its movement pattern. 

The proposed Task Force will consult people affected and also the people where the elephants are to be translocated.

It was also suggested that the State government should strengthen the rapid response team system in Karnataka.

A system of training and facilitating elephant assistance (Kumki elephant) has been suggested to the State Forest department. It may be recalled that the Karnataka High Court on January 4, 2012 had directed to constitute a special task force to find a solution to the man-elephant conflict in Karnataka, especially at Alur range in Hassan, by including some advocates who have impleaded themselves in the suo motu case.