The wild side of Africa 

ADVERTISEMENTWildest Africa’ is a celebration of Africa’s most spectacular locations, showcasing the full 
African experience. 

The show journeys from the cradle of human civilisation to the most awe-aspiring natural wonders of the world by going on a safari to see the continent’s Big Five — lion, elephant, leopard, black and white rhino and cape buffalo. ‘Wildest Africa’ discovers their secret locations, their cultural and wildlife issues as well as how the natural wonders they live in are being threatened and what is being done to overcome these environmental pressures. Watch ‘Wildest Africa’ on November 16 at 7 pm on Animal Planet.   


Who’s turn is it this time?

After Sampat Pal’s dramatic exit last week, today the viewers will witness another exciting exit from ‘Bigg Boss Season 6’, now that Sapna Bhavnani, Vrajesh Hirjee, Niketan Madhok and Aashka Goradia have been nominated for eviction. 

So, today one will see Salman Khan announce the name of evicted housemate , who will have to leave the Bigg Boss house.  So, who’s going to bid goodbye? To know more, watch this exciting episode on November 16 at 9 pm only on Colors. 


The art of gifting

In Kaun Banega Crorepati, Ruchi Pandey from Firozabad gifts Bachchan petha and chudiya for Jaya and Aishwarya.  She even convinces Big B to dance with him on his song Shava Shava. Catch this exciting episode on November 16, 8.30 pm only on Sony.

Of a man and a baby 

For never-do-well compulsive gambler Fong, there’s only one thing more fearsome than debtors at his doorstep — having to coax a crying baby. But what if the baby becomes his golden goose to fend off his debtors? Can he overcome his phobia of diapers, milk bottles, and cloying lullabies?  Watch all the drama in ‘Robin-b-hood’ on November 16 at 11 pm on Star Movies.

Follow a distinct lifestyle 

TLC presents the India edition of the international hit make-over series — ‘What not to Wear’ on November 16 at 10.30 pm. Drawing on the talent of actor Soha Ali Khan and stylist Aki Narula, the series inspires style-challenged participants to trade in drab for fab. From housewives who have put their life on hold to fast track professionals going nowhere with their wardrobes, to entrepreneurs who risk big, except when it comes to their styling. This exciting series helps empower women by giving them a unique identity in keeping with their distinct lifestyles. Watch the tears of realisation and joys of fulfillment as they turn from dowdy to dashing. 

(tv show timings are subject to change)