Creativity took the centre-stage as students from 120 schools across the City came together at the Army Public School, Kamraj Road, to pen their stories at the Annual Story Writing competition organised by Deccan Herald in Education (DHiE).

ADVERTISEMENTThe students were given a choice of three topics to base their stories on. 

However, current issues like wildlife protection and abolition of child labour touched a raw nerve with the secondary and high school students (class 7 to 10). For instance, Sudha, a 14-year-old girl who was sold off as a child labourer by her poverty-stricken parents, caught the attention of most students. While, the existential crisis of a male Northern White Rhino was the talking point of several students.  

On the other hand, the junior students (class 3 to 6) had much fun while writing the stories. Topics like, a butterfly that invites the reader to a magical journey, helped children give wings to their imagination. The topic was chosen by most children.  Abhay Ani­rudha of class 6, from Deccan International, found out that a lizard was eating one butterfly each day. While, Chandana MS from Bunts Sangha RNS Vidyaniketan, though initially refused to accept the butterfly’s invitation, later found herself “catching  ice-cream from a river with a net.”

While the other favourite topic of the day was the appearance of a mysterious girl at the gate of the garden of protagonist, a 10-year-old boy.  The protagonist and the mysterious girl soon become frie­nds. And an adventure begins. Meanwhile, a few students took their chance to tell the story of mankind to an alien, or rather, through an alien from outer space. As the topic suggested, a “Golden Record” with a record of human civilisation gets interce­pt­ed by an “alien.”  The students pondered on what the alien might think of life on Earth.

In the junior section too, only a few were interested to bring the Moon down to Earth. Suresh, a young boy, wanted the Moon to be brought to Earth instead of sending people to the Moon. Venkata Bhamidipati from Euro School, said, “In the story, I brought the Moon down to Earth and gave it to Nasa. Now, nobody knows what happened to the Moon.”