The recent mauling of three people by a tiger in Bandipur has once again brought into focus the issue of human-animal conflict. It is high time this issue is addressed with the seriousness it deserves, writes Madhumitha B.

ADVERTISEMENTIf history should have taught us anything by now, it is that we should have a better human-animal conflict management system in place. The challenge, although huge, is certainly not unfamiliar. The issue is a long-standing one and escalation of conflict has become inevitable. With humans encroaching upon forests, wildlife is forced to venture out as a result of fragmentation of forests.

The most recent incident of a tiger killing three people in the Bandipur area is an indication of the apathy towards a reasonably workable, if not the best, method when it comes to handling highly sensitive conflict-related situations. This lackadaisical attitude towards wildlife management is steadily becoming entrenched in the system. And this can prove to be dangerous for both parties involved.

The specific case of the male tiger, now captured and in captivity, is not related to conflict in the actual sense of the issue. In this instance, the ageing tiger was most likely shunned from its territory by a younger, stronger tiger. In an effort to survive, the older male tiger would have resorted to preying on easy targets such as livestock, or, in this case, human beings.

The ecological history of this particular tiger is now made available by the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) whose team of biologists, led by Dr K Ullas Karanth, Director for Science-Asia, WCS, has conducted a long-term research on several of this big cat species, including the recently captured 12-year-old male. This research history states that this tiger was first camera-trapped in March 2004 at Dodda Dasanne Katte, Moleyur range, and at the time, it was three years old. It was then camera-trapped at least 10 times during the following years, and was last seen via photographic capture on May 11, 2013.

“From the locations of the recent human attacks, which are on the edges of this tiger’s range, it appears that this tiger was evicted from his range post-May this year by a more vigorous rival. He is about 12 years old and in poor nutritional condition with a broken canine and some injuries. Forced to the edges of the forest to survive, he was possibly compelled to kill livestock and at some point, sensing their vulnerability, attacked the three people,” stated the excerpt from the research.

Dr Karanth, one of the foremost authorities on tiger behaviour, explains the science behind the facts in a simple manner, reasoning out why, at times, successful tiger populations could also cause some amount of conflict when proper mitigation measures are not in place.

Competition for territories

“In some of the better protected wildlife areas (such as Bandipur-Nagarahole), the prey densities are very high (30-40 prey animals/sq km). Consequently, tiger densities are also very high (8-15 tigers per 100 sq km). Such thriving big cat populations have high birth rates and high death rates — there is competition for limited territories and much intra-specific aggression. This leads to old or disabled big cats or sub-adults, looking for new territories, being pushed to the edges of the reserve and in turn coming out, leading to conflict and very rarely, man-eating. This does not mean there is no food or water for them inside the reserve as is commonly thought. It’s just that there is a slight surplus that is generated annually along with the natural dispersal behaviour of sub-adults, both of which could lead to this problem.”

Successful conservation is something that Karnataka must attempt to uphold for as long as it can by at least working towards a strategy that can address the conflict in a more proper manner than what we have seen with the latest incident. The response to prevent this tiger from further predation on humans was severely poor, according to several biologists in the State. 

“A pre-planned strategy must exist especially when conflict is a reality and a challenge for wildlife management. At present, there are amateur wildlife ‘activists’ taking charge of operations related to conflict management and with almost no appropriate training coupled with incomplete knowledge. Such sensitive issues cannot be given to people with no experience or expertise in the field, and it must be discouraged. Further, the Forest Department needs to have a system in place with a response team that can take immediate and corrective action in such situations. This is key, as, on the ground, the issue needs to be resolved as soon as possible. The delay in the recent incident, when it came to addressing the threat that existed, did generate angst among the local people, and this is something that has to be prevented for two reasons — to ensure that the local people feel safeguarded in such extreme cases if and when they occur, and, secondly, to ensure that conservation still has its place,” said Dr Karanth.

Public support

The result of a conflict gone fatally bad can spiral things out of control, often throwing off the effort that goes into conservation. Such predation, as the one that occurred in Bandipur, is rare but the consequence of such encounters should not be one that creates antagonism towards the entire species. “This may undermine public support required for conservation of tigers as a species. Over a longer term, we have to focus on saving viable populations of tigers and leopards, for which public support on reserve edges is important,” said Dr Karanth.

Wildlife conservation in India — if it needs to make strides — rests highly on tackling the conflict mankind has developed with nature. That’s where the challenge rests, and, going by decades of such encounters, the systemic response to it should, by now, be more radical than the one in place now. Akin to what a few other nations have, an animal damage control team, for example, could be put together. This could include a senior forester who can make decisions related to wildlife on the ground, a police officer to look into law and order and the huge responsibility of crowd control, a trained wildlife veterinarian, a biologist with knowledge on the species and local trackers.

Things also need to change with respect to the government’s view on wildlife management. This has been said time and again, but to no avail. However, it is something that will continue to be said in the hope that one day it will yield results. Why? Because the importance of preserving nature in its truest sense is in the understanding of the majority. Currently, this effort is generated only by a limited few.