Strumming for a cause

ADVERTISEMENTThe campus of St Joseph’s College (Autonomous) recently witnessed a unique event ‘Guitarists for Peace’. 

The All India Catholic University Federation (AICUF) unit at the college brought together 33 guitarists from the college to play together as a tribute to world peace. 

The main aim behind the event was to sensitise the students about several social issues and injustices done to the marginalised sectors. 

Several numbers were performed including ‘21 Guns’ by Green Day, ‘When the  Children Cry’ by ‘White Lion’ and ‘Knocking on Heaven’s Door’ by ‘Guns n’ Roses’. 

There was also a special dedication made to the people suffering in Syria. The event also hosted a food festival organised and participated by the North-Eastern and Tibetan students. The students prepared their native dishes and represented their states. 

Berin Lukas, a lecturer of the college, described the event as a remarkable performance by the students. 

She added, “This event was truly one-of-a-kind. I have never experienced so much harmony and enthusiasm in any other event. And the cause behind this event too was 
noble.” Ritwik Bhattacharya, a third-year science student took part in this initiative. 

“I loved the concept of bringing together many musicians within the college to perform for such a nice cause. Music is something everyone can relate to and it is a brilliant idea to use it as a method of propagating the cause. I am really glad to be a part of this enthusiastic team.”


Pampering the wild streak

The students of BMS College for Women observed ‘Wildlife Week’. As part of the week, 
students took part in many events including a colourful programme where students came dressed as different animals. 

The programme also included a green march. The main objective was to sensitise people about wildlife protection. The cultural committee of the college was also involved in organising different skits and events that highlighted the subject. 

The students of St Anne’s Degree College for Women, Ulsoor, also observed ‘World Animal Day’. The Eco Club and Reader Leader Club of the college organised a procession from the college premises to Lido Mall. The students came dressed as different Disney animal characters and had strong views about why they should observe this day. 

Kumari Veenu Albert, assistant professor from the department of environmental studies, who helped organise the procession, said, “This event is held to pay tribute to all animal lovers and animals. Animals have inspired so many authors for a while and even Disney has used animals in so many of their movies. This is why we chose to use such costumes.” 

Indra, a second-year BCA student who was dressed as a green dinosaur, said, “Our message is simple — don’t harm animals as this planet belongs to them too.”