Since time immemorial, the temple dedicated to the Goddess Sri Mookambika is famous in coastal Karnataka. Not only the devotees of the State, but people from Tamilnadu, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Maharastra visit the temple in large numbers daily. The temple is one of the Shakthi peethas in the State. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe ancient shrine is situated 120 km from Shimoga and 60 kmfrom Hosanagara. The small village of Kollur lies on the beautiful Kodachadri hill range, a part of the western ghats. In ancient times, the place was known as Kollura or Kollapura. The presiding deity here is called Mookambika, because it is here, that the goddess is said to have killed the demon Mookasura. She dwells in the form of a Jyotirlinga, generally found in Shiva temples. 

The great saint and Adwaita philosopher Adi Shankacharya has installed the panchaloha idol on Srichakra. She is also called as Triguna or the Goddess of triple forms. There are other shrines in the temple. The idol of Chandramouleshwara (Shiva) was also installed by Shankaracharya. The temple has a rich store of mythology. According to the legends, a saint named Kolla had chosen a rock near the Agnitheertham for performing penance. Satisfied with his tapasya, Lord Shiva appeared before Kolla. Sage Kolla appealed for the welfare of the entire mankind which was granted. Lord Shiva told him that an udbhava linga would appear on that place. 

But when Kolla told him that he wanted to perform pooja to the goddess also, a gold line appeared on the linga. That line indicated that the goddess was inside the linga. Another legend says the great saint was meditating at the Kodachadri hills and the goddess appeared before him. He wanted to install the idol in Kerala and invited her to accompany him. But the goddess put the condition that on no account Shankara should turn and look behind. 

Shankara was content listening to the sounds coming from the goddess’s anklets, but after some time, the sounds could not be heard. Shankara turned and the goddess vanished from sight. Shankara then installed the idol at the spot. However there is another small temple on the Kodachadri peak 20 kms away, where the goddess enlightened the saint, it is said. 

Everyday, large numbers of tourists and devotees visit the temple to fulfill their wishes. The journey from Shimoga can be an enjoyable one because the entire route is surrounded by jungles and trees. The temple was built in coastal Karnataka and Kerala traditions. The temple tower is covered in gold and successive Kelady Nayaka rulers of this region reconstructed or renovated the temple many times. There is a small wildlife sanctuary in the area.