The Yettinahole project is only meant for corrupt politicians and officers. It will not do good to any one and will lead to massive destruction, said Malenadu Janapara Horata Samiti President Kishore Kumar.

ADVERTISEMENTHe was speaking at 'Karavali Nela - Jala Samraksha Jatha,' an awareness rally, jointly organised by various environment-friendly associations, with a single motto 'Save Netravathi River' in Mangalore on Wednesday.

Yetthinahole project is not a permanent water solution, to parched districts. It will destroy Western Ghats and the rich biodiversity.

"We are not against providing water to the districts suffering with water shortage. However, through this project neither those districts or DK district will benefit. Dakshina Kannada will lose its only water source. The man and elephant conflict which already exists in the district, may further increase if construction work for the project starts," said Kumar.

It is mandatory that government holds meetings, with people who are affected by the project. This has not been done so far and should be compulsorily done before taking decision, he stressed.

The Rs 8,323 crore project's aim is to supply 24.01 TMC water to Kolar, Chickballapur and Bangalore rural districts. However, only 8 TMC water can be supplied through the project. It further needs 375 MW power to pump water. Hence, it is clear that the project does not serve the purpose. 

The Yettinahole project is proposed in the same place where Gundia project was proposed. This is a tragedy, he regretted.

There is a need to prepare a fair report with all pros and cons, consulting experts with regard to the project. This project is not just about supplying water, there are crores of lives of animals, plants and other species depending on it, he said.

He further added that Water Conservationists Laxman and Rajinder Singh have been contacted to prepare a report on rejuvenating lakes in Kolar and Chickballapur.

The protestors demanded that Netravathi should be declared as a protected site and no projects should be taken up under the Wildlife Protection Act. Declare Yelaneeru (birth place of River Nethravathi) to Ullal as Netravathi flow area and no pollutants and garbage should be dumped in it. Permission should not be given for any other power projects to come up in the area, they said.

An awareness march was held from Jyothi Circle to DC Office prior to the protest.
Various associations from DK as well as Hassan districts, such as Karavali Yuvajana Sinchana, Committee Against Netravathi River Diversion (Uppinangady), Kudremukh Wildlife Foundation, Roshni Nilaya and others took part in the march