After copping criticism and concern by wildlife enthusiasts over plastic and paper littering the tiger reserves, the State forest department has now woken up to the problem.

ADVERTISEMENTIt has now decided to make the entire Bandipur Tiger Reserve a plastic-free zone by imposing a fine of Rs 1,000 on offenders from August 15, 2012.

Henceforth, visitors to Bandipur or those driving through National Highways 212 or 67 (which pass through the reserve), must be careful not to throw plastic waste like empty food packets and bottles as the tiger reserve becomes the first one to be plastic-free in the State.

The department, taking serious note of the harmful effects of plastic on the environment and the danger it poses to the animals will be all eyes all around the reserve. 

“There is need to make this region a plastic-free zone in the interest of conservation and protection of environment. The fine will be levied on the offenders (those disposing plastic waste) in the park as well as along both the highways,” says Kumar Pushkar, Chief Conservator of Forests, Bandipur Tiger Reserve.

Pushkar who initiated similar measures when he was director of Mysore’s Chamarajendra Zoo, has deputed a frontline staff of six members to clear the litter on highways passing through the park. 

The 35 km-stretch of NH-67 between Gundlupet and Masinagudi in Tamil Nadu, of which 16 km passes through the park, is manned by four watchers to clear the road of plastic, while four others are assigned to the stretch on NH 212.

“They will be on foot picking up the garbage (plastic), which will be collected in bags and dumped into drums installed for the purpose. The plastic will be taken to Gundlupet for disposal,” explained Pushkar. 

The department has also taken to educate the public, through signage and by requesting vehicle users not to litter plastic within the sanctuary at the gates. 

Interestingly, several signages installed along the highways have been the target of elephants as the jumbos have destroyed a few of them - one along the road connecting Gopalaswamy Hills and another at the junction where the two highways divide.

The effort has already appealed to visitors. “It is a move which we always wanted to be enforced here. I have seen on several occasions where wild animals were digging into the plastic waste for food. I am taking back the empty plastic cans and bags to dispose them off in Bangalore,” said Raju K H, a City-based wildlife enthusiast and a businessman.