Choked stormwater drains, clogged sewers, inadequate water supply, badly maintained parks and chain-snatchings are some of the major problems bothering the residents of Vijayanagar Assembly constituency, who spoke their heart out during ‘Janaspandana – Citizens for Change’ organised by DH and Prajavani on Saturday. 

Elected representatives, including Housing Minister and Vijayanagar MLA M Krishnappa and eight corporators in the Assembly segment, and a battery of officials responded to people’s grievances at the civic engagement event held at Chandrashekhar Azad Grounds in Hampinagar. 

Girish Malavalli of Vijayanagar set the ball rolling by speaking against the encroachment of footpath by shopkeepers near the Vijayanagar police station. He said there was grave danger to pedestrians’ lives as they were forced to walk on the traffic-filled road. 

In response, BBMP executive engineer Prakash said the shopkeepers would be accommodated in the high-tech Palike Bazaar being built near Indraprastha Hotel. The shops will be fully air-conditioned. BBMP Joint Commissioner H R Vishwanath elaborated, “We have called for tenders to construct 44 shops. The Rs 5-crore project can be completed in five to six months.” Krishnappa said some of the shops would be built below the boulevard, somewhat similar to MG Road. 

Chikka Boraiah, a resident of Maruthinagar, said the ‘Hakku Patra’ given to people like him had no legal sanctity and that they needed sale deeds. The minister promised to issue the sale deeds shortly. 

Ningegowda, a resident of Vijayanagar ward, highlighted the pathetic condition of roads in the locality and how flex boards were present everywhere. The joint commissioner promised that all the flex boards would be removed and the roads repaired under the Nagarothana scheme. 

L Boraiah, from Hampinagar, complained about clogged sewers at 9th ‘C’ Main and said BWSSB officials were unable to replace them for lack of funds. BWSSB engineer Mahesh replied that the work to replace the sewers would begin in a fortnight as funds were no longer scarce. 

Jagannath, a resident of Vijayanagar, said the locality needed a general hospital. “Most of the super-speciality hospitals are located on Bannerghatta Road. These are hard to reach in case of emergency,” he said. 

In response, BBMP health officer Dr Komala spoke of a plan to upgrade hospitals in the ward under the National Urban Health Mission (NUHM).  “A dialysis centre is coming up in RPC Layout. Other hospitals will be upgraded with NUHM funds,” she said. 

Ravi Kumar of Bapuji Nagar sought a BangaloreOne centre in the ward while the residents of Deccan Enclave apartment demanded upgrade of playgrounds. Papanna from Chandra Layout asked the authorities to shift an electricity pole from the footpath as it obstructs pedestrian movement. 

Padmavathi, a resident of Ramco Layout, spoke up against the monkey menace. “About 40-50 monkeys in the area have made our lives miserable. They steal food items from our homes,” she said. Padmavathi said her husband, a wildlife volunteer himself, was once attacked by a troop of monkeys.  The MLA replied that though not much could be done about the problem, the animal husbandry department would still look into it.