Legislative Assembly Speaker Kagodu Thimmappa is coming in the way of evicting encroachers of forest land, the High Court heard on Tuesday. 

ADVERTISEMENTK V Dhananjay, the counsel for Samaj Parivartana Samudaya (SPS) — a non-profit organisation which has filed a Public Interest Litigation (PIL) petition for recovering of government land from private parties and removal of encroachments — levelled the allegation in a memo. 

At a meeting with officers of various departments, the Speaker “explicitly directed them not to evict the encroachers of forest land in several districts of the State”, the memo claimed. 

On June 11, 2013, the Speaker convened a meeting of legislators from the Malnad districts at the Vikasa Soudha and summoned the senior officers of forest, revenue, and social welfare departments. The SPS claims to possess a note prepared by the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Head of Forest Force) sent to the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) on June 29, 2013. 

Encroachments evicted

The reported note said: “It has been found that more than 1.6 lakh acres of forest land have been encroached upon by individuals. The major chunk of these encroachments is in Shimoga, Chikmagalur, Mangalore, Hassan and Canara circles. 

Many DCFs (deputy conservators of forests) in charge of the division, under the guidance of respective chief conservator of forests, have followed the procedures laid in  Section 64 A of the Karnataka Forest Act, 1963, and succeeded in evicting the encroachments in some areas. They have ripped the area and raised seedlings for planting during the current rains.” 

At the meeting, the legislators unanimously opposed the action of the forest department in continuing the eviction. The Speaker concluded that claims under the Forest Rights Act (FRA) would be reopened and the FRA committee reconstituted. He also said that boundaries would be jointly surveyed and the deemed forest notification revisited. 

The Speaker had asked the forest department not to continue with the eviction until the above-mentioned actions were finalised. This caused a setback to the entire programme of eviction, the memo asserted. 

Dhananjay also brought to the court’s notice what he described as the “real hurdles” — illegal interference and intervention by people in positions of power who influence well-meaning forest officials whenever the latter seek to reclaim the encroached forest land.