Preliminary investigation by the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) has pointed out several lapses by the State Forest Department which handled the Belagavi tiger episode.

ADVERTISEMENT“While the Forest Department  is yet to send us its detailed investigation report, our preliminary report submitted to the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) points to many lapses. Standard operating procedures on handling tigers were not followed by the NGO concerned and the  Forest Department  This has also raised many eyebrows in the MoEF,” NTCA sources told Deccan Herald. 

“We had instructed Karnataka chief wildlife warden to capture and relocate the tiger from Chikmagalur to another location where prey density is sufficient. We had not suggested Khanapur in Belagavi district, which has insufficient prey density. We found political and NGO influence in the whole episode. No committees involving locals were formed in Chikmagalur and Khanapur during capture and release, which is mandatory under MoEF rules,” an official said. 

“Most importantly, for radio collaring animals, permission from the Ministry of Telecommunications is mandatory. Radio frequency should be shared with the Forest Department, MoEF and the NTCA. This was not done in this case. We also learnt that this radio collar did not have the required permission,” the official said. 

This issue has raised doubts over radio collars on other carnivores, leopards and tigers in Karnataka. The NTCA and MoEF will soon verify them.

“When we visited Khanapur, we found politicians and NGOs were directing the news, but in such cases all communication to the media and locals should be through the press information officer or through the chief wildlife warden. We have pointed to the presence of NGO members, details of the researcher who had taken photographs with the radio collared tiger and of over 300 forest and police officials inside the reserve forest during the shooting operation. These are all violations and if they are not corrected now, they will recur,” added the official.  

Karnataka houses the largest tiger population in India, around 300, as per the latest tiger census.