The animal-keepers at the Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP) have refused to sign the renewal of contract for this year as they have decided to go on a massive agitation if the Karnataka Zoo Authority (KZA) refuses to accept their demand to regularise their services.  

ADVERTISEMENTThe members of the (anima-keepers’) association have decided not to sign the new contract after their term ended on March 31.  A meeting is scheduled to take place on Thursday between the association members and the authorities to discuss and explore the possibilities of regularising their jobs.

Around 250 personnel stepped up their demand for job regularisation following the attack on one of the animal-keepers last month. The workers have been demanding it since 2002 ever since the Bannerghatta National Park (BNP) was split and the BBP was formed.

In a letter written by Karnataka State Zoos' Daily Wage Workers' Association to the KZA , the members of the association have urged the authorities that a decision on their job regularisation should be taken by holding a meeting with the association on or before April 20, or workers will be holding a massive agitation. The meeting, however, has been scheduled to April 23 (Wednesday).  
 
According to sources, many animals keepers have handed over their land to the BBP to form the rescue centre in 1994-1995, many animal-keepers were given a meagre compensation for their land and were hired on contact to work at the BBP. Many are yet to receive their dues from the government.  

A source said that Mysuru Zoo workers’ jobs were regularised in 1992 and even the jobs of workers at BNP were regularised. But the KZA and BBP authorities just refused to address the problems of BBP’s animal-keepers, the source added. Vinay Luthra, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (PCCF)-Wildlife, said they will be holding talks with the workers about regularisation of jobs.  “There is an opportunity to regularise the services of those who completed 10 years (of service) in 2006. But those who fall in this category are very few.  Most of the animal-keepers working at BBP have just completed four to five years of service,” he added.