District In-charge Minister B Ramanath Rai inaugurated a 50-acre green belt, sponsored by MRPL, at Shivarama Karantha Pilikula Nisargadhama, on Sunday.

MRPL DGM (corporate communications) Prashanth Baliga said the project is implemented as a compensatory measure for the 27-acre land utilised for industrialisation by MSEZ in Jokatte as per the Compensatory Green Belt Regulations provided by the Ministry of Environment and Forests.

Out of the 50-acre project, 20-acre is covered in the first phase and the rest of the 30-acre would be covered in the second phase. The MRPL will provide Rs 29.98 lakh and Rs 39.85 lakh to the Nisargadhama for the maintenance of the green belt for the first and the second phases respectively.

Shivarama Karantha Pilikula Biological Park director H Jayaprakash Bhandary said the acacia plants in the Nisargadhama will be replaced by the plant species of Western Ghats. This will be implemented in phased manner to make the Nisargadhama free of acacia. The acacia leaves do not decompose and will cause obstruction to water percolation.

As part of the green belt programme, 2,000 plants of 52 species of Western Ghats, 1,000 plants of 50 species of medicinal plants, 100 plants of 10 species of aquatic plants, 15,000 plants of Hybrid Napier CO4 fodder grass will be raised. Also, 1,000 saplings of 150 species of host and nectar plants will be grown towards the creation of the Butterfly Park.

The Hybrid Napier CO4 fodder grass will be used as the fodder for more than 300 herbivorous animals such as deer, black bucks and hippopotamus. In case of surplus grass, there is a plan to provide the same to KMF towards animal fodder, at a nominal rate, as there is a demand for cow 
fodder. Also, plantain, pineapple, sugarcane, roots and shoots will be grown to provide food for various other animals. Sprinklers will be used to water the saplings in every 100-feet radius, he added.

Wildlife painting, photography and fancy dress competitions were held as part of the Wildlife Week, which was inaugurated by Mangaluru South MLA J R Lobo.ADVERTISEMENT