Mindless management of grasslands  along with unabated hunting has resulted in the gradual extermination of one of the largest flying birds that can stand tall up to one metre height — the Great Indian Bustard (GIB — Ardeotis nigriceps).

ADVERTISEMENTAccording to the 2011 census, there were nearly 250 GIBs surviving in entire India, with the majority of them living in Rajasthan, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka. Today, wildlife experts say that the figure might have come down to below 100, with 90 per cent of its former ranges and protected areas recording no sighting (extirpated) in the last few years. According to experts, at present, eight to 13 GIBs might be surviving in the wilds of Karnataka. 

The bird, in 2011, was ‘up-listed’ from endangered to critically endangered species by the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) and was brought under the Schedule-I (the highest protection status) of the Wildlife Protection Act of 1972. 

“Just a quarter century ago, these birds were common and were seen even on the outskirts of Bengaluru and Tumakuru. However, today with rampant hunting and destruction of its habitat, very few are surviving in the arid regions of the Deccan Plateau of Karnataka,” says wildlife expert Santosh Martin, who along with another environmentalist Samad Kottur, both members of Society for Wildlife and Nature (SWaN), traced a GIB family — male, female and a four-month-old chick — in the fields of Siruguppa in Ballari district recently. 

They have been tracking GIBs for the last 10 years. The team, consisting of these two environment researchers and other volunteers, is expected to submit their report to the State government by the first week of April. “We expect that based on these findings and a survey report compiled by us, the government will take up conservation measures necessary to improve the status of the bird,” says Samad.

Several experts blame the Forest Department officials for their wrong policies and practices for the current situation of GIBs. Ranebennur Blackbuck Sanctuary in Haveri was declared as ‘home’ for both blackbucks and GIBs in 1974, because of its tailor-made grassland. It was an ideal breeding ground for the GIBs. 

However, officials, after receiving funds from the government, turned this grassland area into a ‘forest’ by planting several trees, including eucalyptus, in the 119 sq kilometre protected area. As a result, the sprawling grasslands have vanished long ago and so have the GIBs.  

With the change in landscape and habitat, the GIBs were ‘forced’ out of protected areas and into unfavourable territories. “These birds need arid and semi-arid grassland or countryside with thorny scrubs and tall grass for their survival,” explains Samad and adds that these birds avoid irrigated areas.

The GIBs are among the few birds that lay their eggs on the ground, thus making them susceptible to all kinds of threats. As these birds were moved out of their protected areas, their eggs were often destroyed by cattle grazing in the fields and by predators like jackal and fox. Due to these factors, hatching of GIB eggs became next to impossible and gradually, they ended up being pushed to the level of extinction.

While habitat loss is said to be one of the major reasons for the present status of the bird, unsuccessful breeding, accidental hunting by blackbuck hunters and excessive human activities in its breeding grounds are other reasons that have worsened the situation. Moreover, experts say that these birds don’t wish to give much work to their wings even when the threat is close to them. 

“These birds play an important role in maintaining the balance of grassland ecology. In fact, they are farmers’ friends as they prey upon termites, grasshoppers, beetles and other insects that harm farm produce,” opines Indrajeet Ghorpade of Hagedal in Koppal, where GIBs were a common sight in the 1970s.  

Not all hope is lost
Though the captured breeding experiment conducted by the forest officials in 1972 over a court order has failed to give the desired results, experts are still hopeful that the number of GIBs can be revived to a great extent. “All we need to do is give it back its grasslands. Remove those tall trees planted in Ranebennur Sanctuary and let the grass grow. We are sure that birds will return to their ‘home’,” says Santosh.
 
The team, along with this and other recommendations, has been requesting the State government to put in place surveillance and monitoring of the birds and most importantly, to confiscate illegal weapons from local people. “We have to learn from the mistakes committed at other sanctuaries like the Desert National Park in Jaisalmer of Rajasthan, where from hundreds of GIBs that were surveyed in 2011, the number has now come to just 13. Similarly, in the Nanaj Bird Sanctuary in Maharashtra, the bird count has decreased from 30 (in 2011) to three. For the last two decades, no one has spotted Great Indian Bustards in the Ranebennur Sanctuary and if immediate steps are not taken at the earliest, we will end up losing one of the rarest and beautiful bird species,” Santosh and Samad caution.