Wildlife conservation and photography. That’s been an enduring marriage as old as the camera itself. 

ADVERTISEMENTTo drive home the point yet again, an array of conservationists, nature filmmakers and ace photographers are converging in Bengaluru this Friday. Rekindling debates on preserving what is left of nature and wildlife, they will spread out their ware in words and works.

On their agenda: The third edition of “Nature InFocus,” a unique two-day nature and wildlife photography festival, coming alive on July 8 and 9 at the city’s Indiranagar Club. Founded by photographer and filmmaker Kalyan Varma and explorer Rohit Varma, the festival line-up also has the works of participating photographers on show. Dwelling deep into her works, Mexican-born marine biologist and photographer Cristina Mitetrmeier will shed light on how she struck a delicate balance between human well-being and healthy ecosystems. She has been a writer and shutterbug for over 25 years, specializing in conservation issues linked to the ocean and indigenous cultures. 

In the same league is Ian Lockwood, an educator and environmentalist with a special interest in tropical forests, obscure mountain peaks and conservation themes in the Western Ghats/Sri Lanka. His works captured on hand-printed and digital black and white imagery, have been showcased in New York, New Delhi, Dhaka and Mumbai. 

Also in the speakers’ list is Jenny Nichols, conservation filmmaker. Her films have been screened at environment film festivals worldwide. Speaker Tui De Roy is an award-winning wildlife photographer, naturalist, and author of many books on wildlife themes around the world. Joining her will be tiger conservationist Hans Dalal, primatologist Dr Anindya Sinha and Former Bombay Natural History Society Director Dr Asad Rahmani. 

Winners of the 2016 edition of Nature InFocus Photography Awards will be picked by a five-member jury. Award-winning compositions, picked by the jury, will be announced at the close of the festival, says Rohit Varma, the festival director.