Lokayukta Justice Y Bhaskar Rao has set a deadline for the State government to provide basic amenities to the tribal communities spread across five districts in the State. 

ADVERTISEMENTJustice Rao held a meeting with the senior officials on Wednesday and asked them to provide them with basic amenities within one year.

The Lokayukta had recently visited the tribal inhabitations such as Puranipod, Seegebetta, Yerakanagadde, Hosapodu, Muthugadagadde and Banglepodu, in Yelandur taluk in Chamarajanagar district. The tribals had put forth grievances such as lack of drinking water, electricity and increasing unemployment in their community. 

They complained against the compensation system in cases of animal attack and the lack of funds to repair their houses. 

“There are 42.48 lakh tribals in the State and they are residing in the forests, reserve forests and plains in Mysore, Chamarajanagar, Dakshina Kannada, Kodagu and Chikamagalur districts. The Lokayukta has directed the Director of Tribal Welfare to conduct an inventory in co-ordination with the district and taluk officials as to how many tribal families in the entire State require new houses,” a senior official said.

He added that the direction also included establishing schools, hospitals, fair price shops with electric and telecommunication lines, and water or rain water harvesting structures. The Lokayukta has also directed the officials to conduct skill improvement training or vocational training as per Scheduled Tribes and other Traditional Forest Dwellers Act, the senior official said. The Lokayukta has directed the officials to disperse compensation to the tribal people even in case they were attacked by wild animals beyond their residential area. 

Norms for compensation

“As per the present norms, the compensation for deaths or injuries caused by forest animals is paid only if the deaths are in the residential area. Tribals who are attacked by wild animals when they go out for collection of minor forest products are not entitled for compensation. The Lokayukta has directed the officials to amend the relevant provisions,” an official said.

The official also said that the Revenue and Rural Development and Panchayat Raj Department had been directed to sanction old age, widow and disabled pensions for the people who are eligible, adding that the lokayukta had directed the officials to submit an action-taken report once in every three months. 

The other officials who attended the meeting are: Dr Rajkumar Khatri (Principal Secretary Primary and Secondary education), Manjunath Prasad (Secretary Social Welfare Department), Vinay Luthra (Principal Chief Conservator of Forests and Chief Wildlife Warden) and K N Vijay Prakash (Director Tribal Welfare).