Longer is definitely better

ADVERTISEMENTWhy would you choose a 5,000-year-old painting better over a 100-year-old? You would most probably believe the older, the better — which seems to be a rule of thumb when it comes to deciding the worth of something.

“The length of time something has been established seems to serve as a cue to its goodness. The longer a policy, medical practice, painting, tree or consumer good was said to exist, the more favourably it was evaluated,” the researchers said.
When asked to choose between four techniques of acupuncture that differed only by the length of time the practice was in use, the participants chose the one that had been in practice the longest.

In another study, when asked to evaluate a painting, participants chose the one they believed to be older. One alternative explanation remained, the researchers said, “People may infer from time in existence that others evaluate the object or practice positively.”

For the last study, the researchers asked participants to choose between two chocolates, and once again, they chose the item they were told had been on the market longer. The reasons given were taste, texture and sweetness, and smell but no one indicated time on the market.

New method to extract oxygen from water

Chemists have found a simple and inexpensive technique to pull pure oxygen from water using relatively small amounts of electricity, common chemicals and a room-temperature glass of water.

Because oxygen and hydrogen are energy-rich fuels, many researchers have proposed using solar electricity to split water into those elements — a stored energy source for when the sun goes down.

One of the chief obstacles to that green-energy scenario has been the difficulty of producing oxygen without large amounts of energy or a high-maintenance environment.
Now, Massachusetts Institute of Technology chemist Daniel Nocera and his postdoctoral student Matthew Kanan have discovered an efficient way to solve the oxygen problem.

To produce oxygen, Nocera and Kanan added cobalt and phosphates to neutral water and then inserted a conductive-glass electrode. As soon as the researchers applied a current, a dark film began to form on the electrode from which tiny pockets of oxygen began to appear, eventually building into a stream of bubbles.

Penguin species experience serious population decline

Ten of the planet’s 18 penguin species have experienced further serious population decline, warn biologists from around the world.

Among the major factors contributing to the decline are, climate change, over fishing, chronic oil pollution and predation by introduced mammals.

Many penguin species are highly dependent on small schooling fish for food. These masses of anchovies, sardines and other small finfish are seasonally brought to many penguin habitats by cold-water currents.

In years with El Nino events in the Pacific, there has been a dramatic warming of sea surface temperatures, which effectively blocked cold-water currents coming up the western coast of South America.

Sea ice also creates an important nursery cover for juvenile krill, which feed on ice algae. Krill is the primary fuel at the base the Antarctic food chain.

Reduced sea ice cover has led to a dramatic decline in krill and will likely lead to a decline in many wildlife populations further up the food chain that relies on krill as its foundation food source.

Soon, microbes would generate clean energy

Microbes could soon be used to convert metallic wastes into high-value catalysts for generating clean energy. 

Researchers from the University of Birmingham have discovered the mechanisms that allow the common soil bacterium Desulfovibrio desulfuricans to recover the precious metal palladium from industrial waste sources.

Palladium is one of the platinum group metals (PGMs) which are among the most precious resources on earth. They possess a wide variety of applications, due to their exceptional chemical properties. PGMs are routinely used in many catalytic systems and are the active elements of autocatalytic converters that reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

Dr Kevin Deplanche explained why new ways of recovering PGMs are needed. 
“These metals are a finite resource and this is reflected in their high market value,” he said.

The precise molecules involved in the reduction process have been identified. 
Hydrogenase enzymes located on the surface membrane of the bacterium carry out the reduction of palladium, which results in the accumulation of catalytic nanoparticles.

The bacterial cells coated with palladium nanoparticles are known as 'BioPd."
The group believes that BioPd has great potential to be used for generating clean energy.