An unprecedented heat wave during summer saw water bodies evaporate in Bandipur National Park, leaving the animals high and dry. The first spell of monsoon rains has brought much needed relief. M R Manjunath was at hand to witness the animals from close quarters.

ADVERTISEMENTThe scene at the Bandipur National Park was grim this summer. However, there are signs of revival in the forest, battered by a particularly harsh sun and bone-dry water bodies failing to quench the thirst of the animals. The first monsoon shower has brought out the green life buried beneath bark and root. Dark green, tall hills out to kiss the sky, draped in a white cloudy veil render the viewer speechless. The unravelling beauty compels the camera to get busy in a hurry!

It is perhaps for the first time ever that the forest, of about 872 square kilometres in area, has had to face an unprecedented drought, even as its 250 small and large water bodies dried up completely. Usually, Bandipur receives an average of 900 mm rainfall every year. But the previous two years were not kind on the region and the amount of rainfall came down drastically. Plants and trees withered; the bamboo flowers which blossom once every 12 years wilted, unable to bear the scorching heat.

“All of us who left this place in search of food and water have now been given a fresh lease of life. With the monsoon arriving on time in the forest, we have returned to our habitats and delight you all just by being ourselves. You chronicled our plight earlier, bringing it to public notice. You are now back to check on us. 

Go ahead, click our pictures while we forage for food that is now easily available, thanks to the rain,” says a herd of elephants. The deer weren’t far behind. At their attractive best during their mating season, they made time to pose for pictures gracefully. Joining them were the bisons.

Not to be left out, a bear seemed to be saying, “a green forest means well-fed and happy animals,” while its cub blinked behind her ears, secure on her back. Soon, momma bear walked away with the cub riding piggyback, making for a perfect photo opportunity. The wild boars nearby remained nonchalant, content to nurse their brood. The wild dogs and the tiger, lying in ambush for their prey, got up and walked away, after realising the camera lens was trained on them. But the flash by the strange black object couldn’t deter a leopard determined to continue staying on its perch atop a tree, waiting for its prey. In short, flora and fauna at the national park seem to be rejoicing the season’s first monsoon shower.

The drought had led to bamboo shoots and other trees and shrubs to wither and saw around seven elephant calves fall prey to tigers. Reason: It’s easy to spot and track animal movements from behind dry shrubs with no leafy cover. Deer do not usually fall prey to the big cat, but the tiger takes its chances, waits and pounces upon the helpless and weak jumbo calf out with its herd in search of food, before dragging it away.

Forest officials became aware of this phenomenon when they came upon a wounded calf which was struggling to walk. The tiger had just about managed to escape the elephants’ wrath. The forest staff then treated the calf’s wounds and it managed to survive for a few more days. The elephants which forayed into farms on the fringes of the forest were scattered by the loud crackers the farmers burst to scare them away. 

Those animals that couldn’t run away were later handed over to the forest department. A calf that got separated from the herd as well as another that escaped the clutches of a tiger are now being cared for at the elephant camp in Bandipur. Kantaraj, the conservation officer of Project Tiger is hopeful. “It is the drought behind all these happenings. Now that monsoon has begun, there’s some respite. If the coming months bring more rain, the whole forest will have turned a new leaf. Literally.”

(Translated by B S Srivani)