In the last few years, South Africa has opened up to Indian tourists in a big way. The country offers them an experience that is filled with adventure sports, history and wildlife.

ADVERTISEMENT This year, South Africa Tourism is conducting its annual four-city roadshow in India, where close to 88 people from South Africa have come down to promote the country as a holiday destination. 

Held recently at the ITC Gardenia, the roadshow described many interesting destinations that one could visit, as well as activities like bungee jumping, whale watching, hot-air balloon rides, underground cave visits, luxurious safaris and many more things that one can do when in South Africa. “Over the last few years, we have witnessed a continuous increase in Indian tourists in South Africa, making India one of the key markets for us. Hence, during the course of this roadshow, we want to bring in newer elements of South Africa that one can explore. We have interesting itineraries as well as packages,” says Hanneli Slabber, the country head of South African Tourism. 

The roadshow wasn’t just about bringing South Africa to India, though. During the course of the programme, the representatives from different South African organisations got a chance to experience India as well. Many of them saw how similar South Africa was to this country. Joan Shaw, the chief executive officer from Oudtshoorn.com, says that her maiden trip to India has been a memorable one. “South Africans are known for their hospitality and that’s something I have seen here as well. People are so friendly and of course, we too enjoy our share of spicy food,” she adds. 

Chantelle Cole, the executive manager of V&A Waterfront and Annemie Liebenberg, the marketing manager of V&A Waterfront, were warned about India’s poverty and dirt. “But I saw neither of the two during my visit here. Perhaps it is because we have visited only the upscale parts of India, but it definitely wasn’t as bad as what we were told. I must say, though, that people here are very friendly and we have all loved the food as well,” says Chantelle. Annemie adds, “The huge gap between the rich and the poor exists even in South Africa. But here, both the rich and the poor live in the same locality and are secure. Nevertheless, we saw how similar we are and it’s nice to get a different perspective.” After Bangalore, the roadshow will soon conclude in Delhi.