A series of animal deaths due to sickness and change in weather has been reported from Sri Chamarajendra Zoological Gardens, here. Four animals - a zebra, a bison, a king cobra and a lion-tailed macaque - have died in the past 20 days, raising concern among animal lovers.

ADVERTISEMENTAccording to sources, Riddhi, a four-year-old zebra, is said to have succumbed to fever and gastroenteritis problem on November 7. It was reportedly suffering from stomach problem since four years. The bison, which was pregnant, has given birth to a stillborn male calf before breathing its last. While the king cobra had died of age-related problems and weakness, the lion-tailed macaque died of lung infection three days ago.

Speaking to DH Kamala Karikalan, Executive Director of Sri Chamarajendra Zoological Gardens, said, post-mortem was conducted on all the animals. “The animals have died of sickness. As their health is continuously monitored, the reason for their death can be easily ascertained. There are no external factors and the post-mortem report will reveal, if any,” she clarified.

Kamala said, 40 CCTV cameras have been installed on the zoo premises. The staff are taking utmost care of the animals. The health condition of a few animals have been affected due to change in temperature and chill weather. But, there is no reason for anxiety as it is a natural process and is common in all the zoos, she added.

She denied the reports that misunderstanding between the officials and the employees is the reason for the series of animal deaths. Kamala said, there is no opportunity for such acts as everything is transparent. “Stern action would be taken against those involved in such acts as Wildlife Act is very stringent. Some vested interests are unnecessarily spreading rumours to bring disrepute to the Zoo,” she added.

It may be mentioned that a few employees had staged a protest last week, urging for fulfilment of various demands. The death of Mirella, a chimpanzee, last year, had given room for doubts as it was suspected to be poisoned.