World Wildlife Fund (WWF) recently brought two very informative films to the notice of Delhiites. WWF organised the screening of Race To Save The Sky – a film on ozone layer depletion, and Biogas – on how the renewable and easily available source of fuel is changing lives in rural India. Both the films, provided by the Centre for Science and Environment – were showcased at the India International Centre (IIC).

ADVERTISEMENTRajpal Bakshi, a member of WWF who conducted the screenings, informed Metrolife, “WWF holds such screenings every fortnight at IIC. The purpose is to inform and sensitise people towards environmental issues. We need to educate the youngsters – collegiate and school going kids – especially, as they are the real benefactors of our future environment.”

Race To Save The Sky was a real eye-opener on how our planet has lost a chunk of its protective cover – the ozone layer – thanks to our use of certain chemicals. Ozone layer reflects the harmful UV rays of the sun preventing skin cancer, crop damage and cataracts. However, it is said that due to the use of harmful Hydroflurocarbons (HFCs) and Chloroflurocarbons (CFCs), we have created a hole in ozone layer as big as the United States.

In 1987, the Montreal Protocol was signed between countries to halt the usage of HFCs and CFCs in refrigerators, air conditioners and other cooling machines. 

Scientists have also been experimenting with various chemicals to replace HFCs and CFCs. However, the problem is that the replacing chemicals, even if ozone-friendly, will cause global warming in future. So scientists worldwide are caught in this cat and mouse game to save the sky.

Biogas, though considered a stench-raising subject, was also an enlightening film for many young members of the audience. It is indeed a rural revolution how the gas emanating from fermentation of cow dung is providing clean, cheap cooking fuel as well as electricity to many villages in India today. It is estimated that 2300 tonnes of wood is saved every year and lakhs of women rescued from respiratory ailments like TB due to the usage of gobar gas.

Not just gobar gas, bio fuel is also provided by vegetable waste produced from different subzi mandis and farms. These are going into the running of several factories and not just village communities. WWF feels that the future of India is bright with the advent and usage of such clean fuel resources.