Flood situation in Assam and Arunachal Pradesh worsened today with death of two persons and fresh areas getting submerged even as three members of a family died in rain-induced wall collapse in Uttarakhand.

ADVERTISEMENTWhile several parts of the country received rainfall, the national capital did not record any rain for the second consecutive day as high humidity levels (between 64 and 84 per cent) troubled Delhiites.

The minimum temperature was recorded at 28.4 degree, a notch above the season's normal and the maximum settled at 34.8 degrees Celsius.

Floods in Assam claimed two lives affecting over five lakh people in 14 districts, besides inundating Kaziranga National Park, Pobitora wildlife sanctuary and Dibru-Saikhowa National Park.

One person died in North Lakhimpur town of Lakhimpur district and another at Mayong in Morigaon district.

The swollen Brahmaputra and its tributaries have submerged 1039 villages in 14 districts with many neck-deep in water and several houses completely submerged, officials said.

Seventy relief camps and seven relief distribution centres have been opened to shelter 21549 flood-hit people.

In Arunachal Pradesh, the flood situation remained grim with fresh areas getting submerged as Chief Minister Pema Khandu directed legislators from Tezu, Namsai and Jairampur to monitor the relief measures.

The rising Noa-Dehing river has submerged entire Lekang circle under Namsai district and affected Piyong circle, Namsai Township and adjoining villages.

Rapidly increasing water level in Jengthu river has affected Mukron, Chessing Nongtaw, Jenglai and Wagon-IV villages. The Lohit, Kamlang, Berreng and Tengapani rivers are overflowing and have resulted in heavy erosion.

In Uttarakhand's Tehri district, three members of a family died in the wee hours when a wall collapsed due to torrential rains. The weather department has forecast heavy rains in Kumaon region.

Water level in the Tehri dam has touched 781-metre mark, prompting authorities to release 528 cusecs of water which may create flood-like situation in Rishikesh and Haridwar in the plains.

The state's MeT department has issued a heavy rain alert for Almora, Nainital, Champawat and Pithioragarh districts of Kumaon region tomorrow. 

The railways cancelled express and passenger train services between Najibabad (Uttar Prades) hand Kotdwar (Uttarakhand) stations due to water level touching the danger mark at a bridge situated between Saneh Road and Kotdwar stations in Moradabad Division, a senior Northern Railway official said.

Delhi-Kotdwar-Delhi Garhwal Express will also remain partially cancelled from July 23 between Najibabad-Kotdwar section till further order.

In Uttar Pradesh, Ganga, Yamuna, Rapti, Rohin, Kuano are flowing near the danger mark at some places while Sharda and Ghaghra have crossed the red mark at four places.

Sharda at Palia and Ghaghra at Elgin Bridge (Barabanki), Ayodhya and Ballia have crossed the red mark.

Gangetic and north Bengal districts received heavy rainfall with Cooch Behar experiencing 78 mm rainfall, Bagdogra 38 mm and West Midnapore 26 mm.