The State Forest department in its enthusiasm to implement the government’s decision to continue with the tradition of parading elephants during Dasara, has been making several compromises.

ADVERTISEMENTLast year, a pregnant elephant was selected to participate in the procession. Balarama, the veteran howdah carrier, is known to be suffering from cataract. This year, two nursing mothers - Varalakshmi and Sarala - were forcefully separated from their calves so that they can take part in Dasara.

Howdah elephant Arjuna, who on Friday exhibited cranky behaviour during ‘gajapade,’ is said to be in musth (heat). While department officials deny it, experts say Arjuna is definitely in musth.

A photograph of Arjuna taken on Saturday when he was being weighed clearly shows that the elephant’s temporal gland is swollen, from where there is also a discharge. 

“The elephant is very much in musth. There is a dark patch between the eye and the ear, which is nothing but a secretion from the musth gland,” said elephant expert Prof Raman Sukumar.

The same was confirmed by Dr P S Easa, scientist, wildlife department, Kerala Forest Research Institute. 

“I do not have an idea about the behaviour of this particular elephant. However, if the animal is in musth (the mahout will know this better), it is always better to avoid parading him.”

He said in Kerala, the period of musth in an elephant could prevail from 20 to 100 days. “The healthier the elephant, the longer it will be in musth period. We have a system whereby all elephants used for public functions, especially in religious processions, are checked at the procession site by a team of vets for health status, including musth. 

If the animal is showing symptoms of musth or has injuries, they are denied permission. There are many instances when elephants have run amok and killed people,” he added.
Kerala’s Dr Jacob V Cheeran, an internationally acknowledged expert on capturing wild elephants and management of captive elephants, said controlling elephants in musth was difficult. 

However, when contacted, the Forest department veterinarian who has been handling Dasara elephants for over a decade now, said Arjuna had “recently come out of musth”. According to Dr Nagaraja, “the condition recently stopped - about a month ago”.

“The secretion seen is only the residue. Last year, a month after Dasara, Arjuna came into musth and stayed in that condition for six to seven months. We are taking all measures to ensure that he does not get agitated. We are giving him ‘cool ration’ that includes buttermilk and rice,” he said.

Dr Nagaraja agreed Friday’s episode could have been avoided. “How can you expect good behaviour from an elephant when there are such huge unruly crowds. People should cooperate and not come close to the animals. It’s best to stop such processions,” he said.