Kasarkod, a village in Uttara Kannada district’s Honnavar taluk, finds a place on the tourist circuit simply because of Apsarakonda, a destination near the Arabian sea. 

ADVERTISEMENTSome visit Apsarakonda for its charming cascade; some love to stroll on the placid beach while yet others trek up the hill to explore the caves there. Apsarakonda has all these and more. It has temples for the devout and a sprawling garden. A great package deal, one must say.

Situated right on the Mangalore–Karwar highway, Kasarkod is quite close to Honnavar at a distance of just six kilometres. A narrow road going westward from here leads to the large plateau of Apsarakonda. 

Even as you get there, the vast blue of the Arabian sea comes into view. What draws your attention is a temple, with a shrine for Umamba Mahaganapathy and Ugra Narasimha. The former, dedicated to the elephant-headed god Ganesha and his mother, is rather rare and is built inside a natural cave. The temple is under the administration of Sree Samsthana of Ramachandrapur Mutt.
A path from the left of the temple leads down the stairs to a charming waterfall. This is Apsarakonda Falls, after which the place is named. It is a stream passing through the rich forests before it becomes a cascade. 

The green transparent pool is captivating. Mythology has it that in ancient times, apsaras, the celestial nymphs, used to bathe here.

A trail leading up a gentle slope opens into a large flat area where the sea comes into view once again as you climb. A lovely paragola with benches affords a stunning view of the sea as also the lush paddy fields down to the right, while the hill on the south runs along to the edge of the sea. The hill itself is moderately high and you can trek up to explore a large natural cave. It gets the name, Pandava caves, as the legendary Pandava brothers were said to have lived here some time during their exile in forests.

Recently, the area around Apsarakonda is being spruced up in a big way. The Departments of Tourism and Forests have joined hands to create a beautiful park with green lawns and walkways. A few statues of wild animals have been erected in order to create an interest and an awareness of wildlife among children. 

The garden is dotted with artistic benches studded with sea shells, colourful pebbles and tiles while the paths brim with flowering plants. 

The best sight, however, is the breathtaking view of the sea from the top. With the cliff edge and greenery in the foreground, the white sandy beach and the blue sea make for a great colour contrast. If you visit the spot in the evening, a glorious sunset view will add to your experience here.

Getting thereDrive towards Honnavar on NH 17, and you can reach Kasarkod village six km before Honnavar (440 km from Bangalore) where a road to the left points to Apsarakonda, which is two km away. You can hire autorickshaws from Honnavar.