As the picturesque hills of Darjeeling simmer following the renewed campaign for Gorkhaland, domestic tour operators are receiving massive cancellations for bus and car services to the hot spots even as trekking and camping trails have gone dead.

For now, Darjeeling is "not on the minds of travellers" opting for Himalayan tourism, said Gour Kanjilal, executive director of the Indian Association of Tour Operators (IATO), New Delhi.

This has prompted tourists to shift to other destinations like Shimla and Kulu Manali in far away Himachal Pradesh.

"Those who have come back have had a bitter experience... No food, no water, no transport. Therefore the rest have decided against going to Darjeeling," rues Kanjilal.
"Now there is uncertainty regarding the festive season (Durga Puja in October) and tourism overall," he said.

According to travel agents in Kolkata, enthusiasts are deviating from Darjeeling and chosing to explore neighbouring Bhutan and the lush forests of Dooars in north Bengal.

"We have recieved cancellations," Suman Pal of Ajanar Sandhaneya (a domestic tour operator) told IANS.

The Darjeeling hills have been on the boil after the Gorkha Janmukti Morcha (GJM) intensified its movement for Gorkhaland - to be carved out of parts of Darjeeling and neighbouring Jalpaiguri district - after Telangana got statehood.

The consequent indefinite strike called Aug 3 has severely restricted the movement of vehicles along the National Highway 31A connecting Siliguri in Darjeeling district with Gangtok, capital of Sikkim.

Nestled in the Himalayan ranges, the sleepy town of Darjeeling (which doubles as a district) is the starting point for avid trekkers and routine backpackers who prefer to go off the beaten track to Sandakphu (highest peak in West Bengal).ADVERTISEMENT
Jeep safaris to the Singalila National Park are veritable treasures for wildlife buffs.
Now, thanks to a shutdown, the trails have run cold and the parks remain bereft of tourists.

"All our bookings for the Sandakphu, Phalut and Singalila stand cancelled. No one wants to go there now," Subash Tamang of Ashmita Treks and Tours in Darjeeling told IANS.

The only option for tourists is the railway. "They are taking the trains instead of buses," said an agent of Wheels and Wings.

According to operators, helicopter services to Gangtok may soon start in full strength.

Yet, with the holiday season set to start, booking agents are hopeful that the GJM will allow tourists to enter the area during the Durga Puja beginning Oct 9.
"It is their source of revenue. So they can't continue like this," said an agent of Gallivant Tours and Travels.