The still Binsar forest, nestled in the lap of Western Himalayas, might seem intimidating on a winter’s night. But as dawn approaches, the forest takes a breathtakingly beautiful form. Nilanjan Coomar reveals the secrets of Binsar

There is a cough in the darkness. From behind the shuttered glass of the window, we peer into the frosty darkness of the December night. It is close to midnight; the crescent moon has floated up over the valley, and the mountains are awash in a soft, milky light. The forest waits. We think we hear a footfall, but the sound does not return. An owl flits, ghostlike, among the pines.

 We wait in silence. It is cold here at 8,000 ft, bitterly cold, and for a long time when nothing moves in the forest, it seems as if the forest has curled up on itself for warmth, hugging its secrets close. And then, suddenly, there is the coughing again, and this time it is much closer. It is unmistakable — a short, sharp bark, and we know it must be a barking deer. In the inky blackness of the night that call means only one thing — that a leopard is probably really close. Early morning, just at the head of the track that branches off from the main road to the camp, we had seen the pugmarks; to now have it so close to us makes the hair stand up on the back of our necks.

We hold our breath. The calls continue for a long time, but then fade away. The night cloaks the forest back into stillness. The silence returns and there is just the crackle of the flames in the corner fireplace. And the leopard lives up to its reputation, and remains the true ghost of the jungle — always there, always felt but hardly ever seen.

Lofty locales

We are in Binsar Wildlife Sanctuary, in the heart of Kumaon, Uttaranchal. Nestled in the lap of the great peaks of the Western Himalaya — Nanda Devi, Trishul and Panchchuli — the forests and the mountains of Binsar are a nature lover’s paradise. About an hour’s drive from Almora, Binsar is much less known than its more famous and more unfortunate cousin tourist attractions in Kumaon, like Corbett and Nainital. Perched on top of the Jhandi Dhar Hills, this area of just over 45 sq km of wilderness was designated as a wildlife sanctuary only in 1988. What it perhaps lacks in size and pedigree, it more than makes up with over 200 recorded bird species, and with the fact that it is one of the last remaining tracts of temperate broadleaved oak forests in the middle Himalayas. |ADVERTISEMENTThere are important species of mammals that are to be found here as well, with the leopard as the apex predator. The flora is typically alpine with ferns and hanging mosses and the oaks, pines, and deodars rise to the skies with a gentle and assured dignity. In early spring this jungle takes on a different look when the rhododendrons bloom and the forest green is speckled with dots of flaming red.

In the morning, we look out the window at the rugged peaks of Trishul and Mrigthuni sparkling icy-white in the winter sun. The sky is clear and a spotless blue. We are all deliriously happy. For city-bred souls gasping for the purity that only mountains can offer, the fear of foul weather that can blot out the mountain vistas for days on end is a fear that is very real. But our man Friday Shankarji, who is the butler, steward, cook, porter all rolled into one, assures us that winter is indeed the time for the uninterrupted panorama to be truly enjoyed.

For even better views, we trek up to Zero Point. It is not an arduous walk, but there is the occasional slope that can leave one panting in frigid air. Along the way, the air throbs with birdsong. Tits, forktails, nuthatches, thrushes and parakeets are everywhere. The boughs above us are full of flitting shadows. We sight the big and beautiful Eurasian Jay, and there are of course the rofous sibias, the large hawk cuckoos, and the great barbets. The dry leafbed on the jungle path crunches under our feet. 

A troop of langurs, alerted by the noise, are curious to get a closer look at our walking group, and follow us for quite a while along the trail, swinging fearlessly from trees. And once, as we round a bend in the track, a pair of startled mountain goats bound down the slopes, and then stop to turn and watch us, eyes swivelled in surprise. One of the great joys of Binsar is that it is among the very few wildlife reserves of India where the privilege of walking through the jungle on foot is granted to the amateur trekker.

View from the top

Perched well above the cloudline of the valley, Zero Point is a vantage point for viewing the great panorama of the Western Himalaya. And what a panorama it is! Stretching for over 300 km along the horizon, the jagged peaks look like an endless streak of distant diamonds across the sky. Straight ahead, we can see the peaks of Nanda Devi (the highest peak wholly in India) and Trishul and, far to the right, the quintet of the Panchachuli massif. There is a line in a Ruskin Bond story that says “men come and go, the mountains remain”. Standing there, soaking in the immensity and in the timelessness of the view, that line from the author comes to mind and words like human insignificance and humility take on new meanings. 

Another time late in the afternoon, on another trek to this place (Shankarji’s perceptive advice was that there are only three things to do at Binsar — eating, sleeping and walking!), we just gaze silently at the defiant thrust of Nanda Devi into the sky, and at the clouds from the valley gently rolling up along the oak-covered slopes that plunge all the way to Ghoralkot. The silence and the stillness creeps into our bones, as the last rays of the setting sun get to work lighting up the western flank of the goddess mountain.
Binsar has other attractions on offer. 

There are day-visits to the wondrous temples of Jogeshwar, which are 60 km away. Ageless temples dedicated to Shiva and Parvati (with references to Bineshwar Mahadev, a corruption of which gives Binsar its current name), temples to Lord Golu, legends about the mythological battles fought between the gods and the King of Binsar — they are all waiting to be explored. The Binsar Sanctuary Museum also offers an educative insight into the natural history of the region.

Back to nature

But, above all, Binsar is about the splendour of silence. In today’s world, where the evils of clinging to the pointless appendages of life and the pursuit of ill-conceived ambition have taken us so far away from the core of our real selves, Binsar offers us a fleeting chance to get back to who we really are. And it is not as if this silence speaks to us city dwellers only. 

One evening, sitting by the fire in the kitchen, Shankarji offers a peek into the struggles of the life of the average Kumaoni. Back home in his village, he tilled a small patch of soil, coaxing it to yield a living, but it was tough work with little, uncertain rewards. Out here in the camp, there is so much more that he has to do, but the certainty of being able to steadily provide for his family is fair compensation and, over time, he has grown to enjoy the toil in this silence. He misses his family, for sure, and he visits them whenever he can. But, he says, and his eyes hold a slight smile in them when he says it, that something about the clutter of home and the press of family and children makes him want to return here as soon as possible, and he finds himself making his way back at the earliest opportunity — often to the consternation of his people. It must be the peace and the silence here, he thinks; once it has grown on you, there is indeed no turning back.

And so, on the last day, after the last walk has been walked and the last sunset has been seen, it is to the splendour of this silence to which we must return one final time. We sit on the high knoll above the camp, under the shadow of the large pines, and watch the eagles soar in the thermals rising high up above the valley. Far out in the distance, a horse neighs. The bulbuls gently chatter. The bell tolls at the small shrine at the end of the camp road. Suddenly, a mad flock of parakeets screech out of the trees on the last flight of the day. 

The stunned forest recovers, and then a gentle wind comes down from the icy mountains, rustling through the trees. Like a balm that soothes, like a herb that heals, it tells us to hush and to listen and to remember forever the beauty of the stillness all around.