Experimentation in different mediums of art is on a new high. Two acclaimed artistes – Kolkata-based painter Aparup Mukherjee and well-known nature photographer Mahesh Nair have come together with 12 sets of paintings and photographs.

ADVERTISEMENT Mahesh has taken pictures of breathtaking sceneries across the world while Aparup has recreated them on canvas with his brush and water colours. This exhibit, aptly titled ‘Samanvay: Visual harmony,’ is on at Religare art gallery, Saket till March 1.

While paintings have been considered art for a long time, photography as an art form has been accepted only in the last few years across the world. Essentially, the camera has been accepted as a tool and a photographer as an artist. Keeping this in mind, the artists have created a ‘combo’ of the two art forms. The paintings and photographs are also being displayed and sold in sets to 
art lovers.

Mahesh informs Metrolife, “Originally, Aparup was commissioned by the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) to make some paintings related to nature and wildlife. Since I have been photographing these subjects for a long time now, Aparup asked me to supply him with some suitable pictures. That is when we thought: why not put a combined exhibition?”

“To make things even more interesting, the photographs have been printed on imported archival canvas as well as in exciting new mediums such as glass and wood. Meanwhile, the paintings have been done in different mediums such as pencil, charcoal, watercolour and other mediums that the artist found appropriate to create from the given photograph.”

Mahesh has shot extensively in India. His pictures include the backwaters of Kerala – coconut trees, boathouses, lily ponds, village dwellers etc., Ladakh – its various hill ranges, palaces and monasteries, and the majesty and architecture of forts in Jodhpur, Jaipur, latticework windows in Fatehpur Sikri et al. Besides, he has taken stunning pictures of ecological parks and thermal springs in New Zealand as well.

All of these have been replicated on paper by Aparup. While some are so strikingly similar to the corresponding photographs, that it is difficult to tell the difference, others have made stronger and more vivid use of colours. Undoubtedly, it’s a unique combination. 
      
To further enhance the value of the ‘combo,’ the photographs have been created in ‘single editions.’ It means that the photograph is a unique piece much like the painting and the buyer would get two unique pieces in the ‘combo.’
DHNS