Ashish Parmar is a Bengaluru-based photographer who is also the first Indian to be featured on the ‘shot on iPhone 6s’ campaign by Apple Inc. ADVERTISEMENTHe is best known for his love for wildlife and capturing the photographs of the big cat. He is the official photographer at Vh1 Supersonic and Storm Festival and was also the photographer at MTV Roadies, 2018. From wildlife, Formula 1, IPL and food to celebrity weddings and music festivals, Ashish’s has done it all. He was also the official photographer of Neha Dhupia and Angad Bedi’s wedding. Actor Leonardo DicaprioI admire Leonardo Dicaprio for his powerful acting. He is a versatile actor and he can play even the most challenging role with ease. Having no background in acting, yet, coming into the competitive world of cinema and making a mark for himself is inspiring enough. All his movies have something to live by. ‘Wolf of Wallstreet’ is one of my favourite movies.   Travel Maasai MaraMaasai Mara in Kenya is my go-to destination. I visit this place at least three to four times a year. I go there to see my big cats. The sunrise and sunset of Maasai Mara are beautiful and something one should experience at least once. Coorg is another place I love travelling to. The green hills and the misty mountains are the instant attraction. Ladakh is another place I travel to every year. Whenever I am on the move, I love meeting the locals and going for wildlife safaris.Cuisine Thai Along with being a photographer, I love cooking as well. I like Thai cuisine. The use of green, fresh flavours like lemongrass, basil and lime seeds, and fresh coconut milk makes it exotic and my favourite. I can dish out a Thai curry in about 20 minutes for 10 people. ‘Pandi Curry’ and ‘Kadambutt’ are other dishes I love gorging on. These are the staple dishes of Coorgis. PhotographerWaseem KhanThere are so many photographers of different genres that I look up to. When it comes to fashion, Waseem Khan is a true inspiration. He is great with his camera and lighting. I like how he lights up his subjects, be is food or models. In the wildlife genre, Aditya Singh and Shaaz Jung are two photographers I really admire. Aditya’s tiger portfolios are amazing and one of the best in the world I can say and Shaaz’s leopard and panther portfolios are brilliant.Music Pink FloydPink Floyd is my all time favourite. Their lyrics is something that I can relate too. It is so meaningful. I can listen to the same song when I am sad, happy or need inspiration. I have all their albums on my phone. Most of the time, when I at loss of words, I refer their lyrics to describe a picture. They have played a big role in my life. InspirationJayant ParmarMy father has been my biggest inspiration. Whatever I am today, is because of my mom and dad. They have helped me a lot in my journey as a photographer. Dad always told me not to run behind money, instead, earn as much goodwill as possible. I have always followed this advice.