Sahyadri Sanchaya, a group of green activists, has urged the State government to announce the stretch from Elaneeru Ghat to Pushpagiri as Netravathi Reserve Zone.

ADVERTISEMENTAddressing mediapersons here on Friday, Sahyadri Sanchaya activist Dinesh Holla expressed concern about the massive destruction of biodiversity in Western Ghats. 

“When the members of Sahyadri Sanchaya went on a trekking expediction to Charmadi Ghat recently, they found hundreds of acres of forest land burnt. The grassland has decreased and trees have been reduced to ashes and a lot of animals and birds have been killed. Generally, forest fire occurs in April and May. But this time, the forest fire has engulfed the forest area in the month of January itself. At some places, it is the natural fire and in other places it is man made. Around 200 acres of forest area at Balegudda, Jenukal, Dodderibetta, Hosmanegudda, Ramanabetta, Minchukallu, Somanakadu, Aniyurukanive, Ambatimale and Barimale, are affected,” he claimed. 

Holla said that the Forest Department has failed to control the fire due to lack of equipment and sufficient staffers. Also, there is a lack of commitment among the department staffers. 

“When we informed about the incident, the forest department officers of both Dakshina Kannada and Chikkamagaluru district tried to shy away from their responsibilities saying the forest area does not fall in their limits,” he regretted. 

Estate mafia
He said estate owners are extending their rubber, coffee and rambutan plantations by clearing trees in hundreds of acres of the reserved forest area as the Forest Department has turned a blind eye towards their encroachment. Electric fences erected by the estate owners have been troubling the wild animals and at many places, animals are electrocuted. The elephant corridor in Banjarmale - Elimale - Ambatimale has been affected due to the formation of estates, he claimed.

Holla said animals do not have food as the estate owners have chopped off fruit-bearing trees to encroach upon the forest land. There is no water as the water available through natural sources is drawn by the estate owners for their plantations. Lack of water Kallugundi and Abbi Falls is evident for this phenomenon, he stated. 

He said animals which live in low-lying area of Western Ghats are forced to move to higher places because of commercial plantations. Elephants in the Shola range are moving upwards, he added. The hydroelectricity project being implemented across Mrithyunjaya, a tributary of River Netravathi in Charmadi Ghat, has also affected the movement of wild animals, he remarked. 

Holla claimed that ganja mafia is also active in the reserve forest and the tribals are also facing a lot of problems. 

He said the Forest Department should regulate the entry of people into the reserve forest areas. Many people go to forest for picnics and litter waste, plastic items and wine bottles here and there. The department should conduct Vanyadarshana (forest tour) programmes for college students to create awareness on environment protection and wildlife. 

Cleanliness campaign
He said Sahyadri Sanchaya is organising a Western Ghat cleanliness campaign involving students and general pubic. 

Garbage in Charmadi, Bisile, Didupe, Agumbe, Gadaikallu and other forest areas will cleared, he said and requested the people to take part in the programme.
 
Illegal hunting  
Activist Shashidhar Shetty said a lot of wild animals are killed due to illegal hunting in Sullia forest area.

He said 2,300 families are living in the forest area and 4,400 gun licences have been issued. At night, people enter the forest with guns and shoot the wild animals misusing the gun licence meant for the protection of agriculture, he said. 

He questioned the purpose of granting permission to use 10 mm - 15 mm bullets. The real intention of gun firing is to shoot in the air to scare away the wild animals by making sound, he said and urged the Forest Department to take action against illegal hunters. A letter has been written to the Home Department in this regard, he added.
DH News Service