He describes himself as a “weekend photographer”. But this weekend hobby of Raviprakash SS has led him to win many laurels, including international ones. The most noticeable of these was a recent award at the Wildlife Photographer of the Year 2014 which was held at the Natural History Museum, London and organised in association with the BBC. His work, ‘Divine Snake’, which is of a green snake in the wild, won the ‘Amphibians and Reptiles Category’.

ADVERTISEMENTThe humble photographer, who hails from Sringeri, is software engineer in TCS and indulges in nature photography every time he goes to his native place. “This photograph was taken just ten feet away from my house,” he says of the ‘Divine Snake’. His interest lies in macro photography. “I like capturing the small things in life,” he says. 

Another highly appreciated work of his is ‘Pure Magic’. As the name suggests, the photo is magical and the first glimpse of it can lead one to interpret many things, like a light in a tunnel. “However, it’s a close shot of a spider web,” he explains.  Raviprakash was always interested in photography. “I was brought up in the Western Ghats, amidst so much of beauty. When my father discovered my passion for it, he gifted me a camera. So I started clicking at a young age,” he notes. 

He cherishes his experience at the Natural History Museum in London, where he even had the opportunity to meet David Attenborough. 

“It was a dream come true. He was appreciative of my works,” he gushes. His images are travelling across the world now with ‘Divine Snake’ being showcased in Australia and USA. “When I met photographers from various parts of the world in London, they were surprised at two things — the fact that I had shot the images with a basic DSLR and that photography was only a hobby for me and not a full-time profession,” he recalls. Does he plan to take it up full-time? “Definitely, I would love it and nature is my interest. But the encouragement is less here and people don’t consider photography a big deal,” he notes.

He plans to continue capturing and experiencing nature at its best. “I have conducted various sessions for places like the Photographic Society of Madras too,” he says.  Does he have any advice for budding photographers? “I’d suggest them to try out macro photography. It’s less popular compared to any other kind of wildlife photography. But it has an advantage as you don’t have to travel to national parks and spend hefty amounts for safaris,” he says. According to him, all one needs to be a successful photographer is “passion”. 

“Passion helps you take criticism in the right stride too,” he adds.