With India recording 72 tiger deaths in the past six months, Project Tiger directors should take necessary steps to strengthen conservation measures, said Vaibhav C Mathur, Assistant Inspector General of Forests (AIGF) of National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA).

Speaking at a meeting of conservators of forests and directors of 14 tiger reserves in South India at K Gudi camp, under Biligiri Ranganatha Swamy Tiger Reserve limits, in the district, the NTCA official said, “Only 20% of the tigers have died of natural death. The number of tigers being killed by poachers for illegal business is alarmingly high. I will discuss with the governments to fill vacant posts in the lower grades to guard the forests properly and prevent poaching activities, Mathur said.

“The officials of both states (Karnataka and Tamil Nadu) should operate in tandem so that the borders are secured and do not permit illegal activities from both sides. Camera trappings is a must in forests to collect data, which might be useful,” he said.

Debate
The tiger deaths is debated seriously and is also raised in the Parliament. The officers should be able to provide exact details to the questions of the Members of the Parliament. Hence, it is important to provide autopsy reports of tigers, photographs and lab reports. Only then it is possible for the NTCA and directors to gain the trust of the people, he added.

P S Somashekar, Inspector General of Forests (IGF), National Tiger Conservation Authority (South division), said, “The meeting was being held to discuss tiger deaths that were reported in 14 tiger reserves in South India between 2012 and 2016.

Tribal hamlets
Pointing out that there are tribal hamlets in the tiger reserve, Somashekar said, the authority has released funds for relocation of the hamlets at Nagarahole and Mudumalai Tiger Reserves. 

While rehabilitation is complete at Mudumalai, it is yet to be taken up at Nagarahole, he added. State Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) B J Hosmath, CCF (Chamarajanagar Circle) B P Ravi and Project Tiger Director S S Lingaraju among others were present.