The tour of a herd of elephants to the Heritage City seems to be over finally. However, it took the concerted efforts of more than 70 personnel of the Forest department to successfully drive away the eight elephants that had ventured close to the city on Monday and Tuesday.

ADVERTISEMENTOn Wednesday, trackers and guards kept a close watch on the herd comprising three males, four females and a calf and drove them safely towards the Bandipur Tiger Reserve.

 Deputy Conservator of Forests, S D Gaonkar, said that there were some anxious moments, as the trackers had lost sight of the herd in a bamboo thicket near Jayapura in Mysore taluk.

“There were 35 to 40 people tracking the elephants. We are driving the elephants away in the proper manner,” he said and added that the anxiety for the Forest department would not be over till the elephants were back in the forest. Forest department staff from Sargur, H D Kote, Nanjangud, Mysore and staff of wildlife department were employed in the operation.

Apart from them, four elephants, Gajendra and Srirama from K Gudi elephant camp and Vikram and Prashanth from Dubare elephant camp were also brought to drive away the jumbos.

On Wednesday, the elephants were at a social forest atop Chikkarasanakere Hill, near Arasanakere in Mysore taluk, about 16 km from the city. At around 1.30 pm, shots were fired in the air and hand crackers bursted by the trackers and guards to drive the elephants down the hill, towards Gujjegowdanapura in Mysore taluk.

By evening, the elephants reached River Kabini, bordering Mysore and H D Kote taluks, as they were successfully guided to a path charted by the Forest department.
“The elephants will later be driven to Chikkadevanabetta Forest Area, which is close to Nugu reservoir in H D Kote taluk,” he said. 

Assistant Conservator of Forests, B Basavaraju said that the drive would continue during the night.

Crowd control

Despite efforts by the Forest department to ward off unnecessary crowd close to the elephant herd, a good crowd had accumulated in areas close to where the herd was being driven away. However, the numbers were significantly lesser than the ones seen during the past two days. 

“Elephants get confused and are also annoyed when they hear loud noises. Moreover, the crowd spreads rumours that threaten our operation,” he said.

With elephants almost entering the city on Tuesday, Gaonkar said that the drive away operation entered its most difficult phase during the day, with a large crowd almost jeopardising the efforts of the forest department. 
“Now, the situation is in control,” he said.