Speaking with the mediapersons on the sidelines of inaugural ceremony of ‘Sowparnika Nadi Moola Samrakshana Abhiyan’ (Sowparnika river source protection campaign) at Anejari Wildlife Sanctuary jointly organised by Western Ghats Task Force, Kundapura Forest Department and Kundapura Forest Division here on Tuesday, he said attempts will be made to find solutions through proper programmes to redress the grievances of tribals living in the Western Ghat region. 

“A two-day talk was held last month with experts at Jogha of Uttara Kannada district regarding Medicinal Plant Conservation (MPC). As many as 13 medicinal plant conservation spots has been identified across the state and 10 more will be identified shortly,” he said and added that the conference of environmental organisations will be organised in Sagar to discuss on the medicinal plant conservation next month.  

The Government has stopped issuing notices for mini hydel projects in the state. Mini hydel project at Dandelai has been stopped. PIL has been filed against Gundya, Hassan mini hydel project. 

A policy will be chalked out to curtail sand mining activities, he added. He said the Task Force has identified nine districts in the state coming under Western Ghat region with the urgent need for saving the sources of rivers from all sorts of pollution.
 
The Task Force was organising second such campaign to save river Sowparnika. The first attempt was held at Kollegala to save river Cauvery. 

The next campaign will be organised at Belgaum to save river Malaprabha on January 18, followed by Chikmagalur on January 27. 

Similar campaigns will be held at Uttara Kannada district,  he said.  Ashisara said forest committee, Panchayats and elected members besides general public and students will be actively involved in taking steps to preserve and protect the west/east flowing rivers and its origins. 

He said “Sowparnika river has been highly polluted and is unsafe for drinking. The local health department and temple management should to take necessary steps to stop further pollution of the river. There is an urgent need for a proper and scientific drainage and sewage system at the temple town,” he stressed.

“All these facts will be brought to the notice of the district administration. I will also write to Karnataka Pollution Control Board (KPCB) urging its chief to visit Kollur for on spot verification,” he added.ADVERTISEMENT