World Environment Day (June 5) was celebrated with green gusto in various parts of Karnataka.ADVERTISEMENTHundreds of saplings were distributed to all young and old people who showed up for awareness programs.The commitment was apparent among participants who dug up hyacinth from clogged lakes, planted saplings and took out marches to spread conservation messages.   ManglauruSapling distribution began at 6 am at the Kadri park in Mangaluru on Tuesday. By 7 am, almost all the saplings were done distributing. This program which was hosted by Prajavani Kannada Daily (a sister publication of DH), received many kudos from the participants.  MysuruAs part of World Environment Day on Tuesday, the host organisation 'Prajavani & Deccan Herald Balaga' planted saplings on the banks of Kukkarehalli lake located within University of Mysuru campus (Gangotri). Wildlife photographer Krupakar, MLA L Nagendra and Palike member R Lingappa were present. HubballiAt the Indira glass house, in Hubballi, sapling distribution was held by Deccan Herald-Prajavani dailies. MLA Abbaiah, Mayor Sudhir Saraf, Palike member Mohan Hiremani, actor Yeshwant Deshpande, Sahitya Bhandar owner Subramanya, Prajavani Hubballi bureau chief B N Sridhara and Prajavani Assistant General Manager Diwakar participated.  HospetWorld Environment Day was observed in a novel way in Hospet. Divisional Commissioner Gargi Jain who inaugurated the program offered flowers to trees in the form of worship.Signboards carrying conservation messages were put up at the venue. A procession was taken out on the occasion in which school children participated. A rangoli competition for children, with conservation themes was held.  Kalaburagi  A walkathon was held to spread conservation awareness in Kalaburagi on Tuesday. Deputy Commissioner R Venkatesh Kumar flagged off the walk which culminated at Jagat Circle. Later saplings were planted on the banks of the Sharanabasaveshwara lake bund. Students in large numbers, ZP CEO Hepsi Bharani Korlapati, and other officers were present.