A bowl full of ragi porridge with milk and honey, along with pieces of watermelon, are kept in front of 18-year-old sloth bear Aman.

ADVERTISEMENT But he refuses to eat and wanders from one corner to another of his enclosure. Blind, Aman has lost appetite in the past two months.

That is the story of nine other sloth bears too at the Bear Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre (BRRC), Wildlife SOS in Bannerghatta. Veterinarians are unable to diagnose the problem. They say that the bears are showing symptoms of TB. 

Nine sloth bears died at the rescue centre since 2010. Recently, two - Yamini and Vivek - died and their post mortem reports established mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) to be the cause of their death. 

“Post mortem showed a huge amount of puss in the lungs. It is a miracle that the animals survived for so long, despite the infection,” said Dr Arun A Sha, veterinarian at Wildlife SOS.

Non-availability of TB test kits for sloth bears forced the vets to use test kits meant for elephants, adding to the confusion surrounding the diagnosis and treatment.

 Two teams - from Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology (RGCB) and International Animal Rescue, UK - visited BRRC two months ago and distributed kits meant for elephants. But the kits have been giving false results for TB, placing the vets in a dilemma. 

Further, the combination drug for TB ‘Rifampicin Isoniazide,’ which is being administered to these animals along with food, is leading to side effects and weakening the animals’ immune system.

Dr Shalu Verma, veterinarian from the Indian Institute of Science (IISc), has offered to develop a test kit for bears.

“I have to get permission from the officials and start work thereafter. I will be able to develop the kit in six to 12 months,” she said.

However, BBP’s Executive Director R Raju said developing a test kit for bears was not necessary, as checking the spread of the infection was the priority now. 

“There is a possibility that the bears may have contracted the disease from humans. We are planning a comprehensive health check-up for all our staff and a compulsory TB test to identify and treat the infection,” Raju said.