There are two characters who are "very important" in the movie--veteran film-maker Fazil's son Shanu (Fahad Fazil) and Manish, a newcomer, who is paired opposite her.

"There is also John, a dancer, who has appeared in a few movies.. The other boys are all newcomers."

"I am a wildlife photographer in the movie and I meet these six guys who have been selected for an IPL cricket tournament and become their friend and fall in love with one of them," Bangalore-based Rupa told PTI.

The shooting is going at a fast pace and work would most probably be over by November 10. The plan is to get it released on December 25. The unit started shooting on October 2 and it has been non-stop shooting for the past 30 days, she said. They have shot mainly in Kochi.

"Right now we are shooting at Gundalpet near Mysore."

Rupa was the female lead opposite serious actor Ajmal in the much acclaimed J S Nandhini directed Tamil movie Thiru 'Thiru Thuru Thuru' (T4) released last year.

Rupa said in T4, a romantic comedy,the story was different. "I was a perfectionist, particular about things the way it should be. Here I am a wildlife photographer, carefree about life.. a daring photographer..more of a bindaas type.

"There are twists and turns. It has comedy, love, action there is everything. It is a fun-filled subject basically, a youth movie."

The characters are well-etched out. "I am really fortunate and lucky…you know... that for  a first movie in Malayalam, I got a very big project. Everybody knows Lal sir that he is an amazing actor and a director as well. He has written the script and is also the producer. Venu is doing the cinematography.He is one of the best cinematographers we have (in the country)."

There is also popular comedian Salim Kumar and veteran actor Siddiq in the movie. 

Rupa is a Tamilian born and brought up in Bangalore. She knows Tamil, Kannada, Telugu and Hindi.

"Yes! I am learning Malayalam now."

For the movie, her lines are being written in English and then she delivers the dialogues.
"There is one person Ambika who helps me with the dialogues. She writes it for me in English and she helps me with my diction".

Lal's production team members were on the lookout for a female lead and had looked at a lot of people.

"They checked my clippings, trailers and shots of T4 and called me. That is how it happened," she said.

"It has been a really, really nice experience. People have treated me so well that I feel home. They did not make me feel out of place.I don’t know Malayalam that well, but I gelled well with people…."

Rupa, a graduate in mass communication, always wanted to be an actor. "Being an actor was a dream, a passion right from childhood...I wrapped up my graduation for acting. My parents were dead against it initially, but I convinced them..."

Her Tamil movie ‘Naan’, a musical thriller, in which up and coming Tamil music composer Vijay Antony plays the lead, is slated for release in January next, "probably during Pongal" (harvest festival of Tamil Nadu).

The movie is directed by Shankar, a former assistant of the late cameraman-turned-director Jeeva. She has a couple of other Tamil projects which are at a 'discussion' stage.ADVERTISEMENT