Dayananda Sirigere injured his leg in a road accident recently, but a few weeks on, he’s happy it happened. “It made me focus and develop two new camera lenses,” says Dayananda.

ADVERTISEMENTThe 54-year-old has about 30 cartons with a variety of these stacked in his home in Chandra Layout — the outcome of years of pottering around with PVC pipes, old camera and xerox lenses. So they cost only a fraction (not more than Rs 5,000) of the lenses available in the market, he informs. 

“But mine neither have the same finish nor can they be used on auto mode,” he admits. “However, they can be attached to DSLR as well as compact cameras.”

The latest additions to the collection include a wide-angle lens which, according to him, spans over 180 degrees, “while a regular fish-eye lens covers only about 120 or 130 degrees.” 

The other is not strictly a lens; it’s a 4X convertor, which increases the zoom capacity of any lens it’s attached to by four times. This has fetched him some great shots at Cubbon Park.

“I’ve started going there every Sunday morning. I’ve seen snakes and other wildlife. I’ve even managed to capture a rare moment — a kingfisher, some other bird, a squirrel and a rat eating together,” he gushes. Dayananda’s tryst with the camera and lenses was sparked by his father. “He was a government school teacher, but very learned. He taught me the physics principles that the camera operates on,” says the BA graduate. “He loved cameras too, but couldn’t afford great equipment.”

The father and son had a small income coming in from shooting black-and-whites in their village. 

Another trigger from his early days in the village was his love for gazing at the night skies. “In Sirigere, where I hail from, the skies are so clear — there is no light pollution,” he recalls with a touch of nostalgia. “Whenever I heard someone talk about a planet, I would be overcome by an urge to get a closer look at it. So I thought why not put together a telescope?”

Gradually, his efforts to create telescopes expanded to include lenses as well. He had no manual to follow, so most of what he has created has been through trial and error.

“And till she died, my dog Lavanya was my companion every moment of the day,” he says. “Whenever I went up to the terrace to test a lens, she would pick up another small one in her mouth and bound alongside.”

If he stayed on the roof all night, so did she. “But the minute I came down and spread my mat, she would lie flat on her stomach and slip into a deep sleep,” he adds. “She was more like a daughter than a dog — she would only eat out of my hand, literally.”

She died a few years ago, soon after he moved to Bengaluru, but she’s in his thoughts whenever he’s working on his lenses. 

Dayananda and his wife Ratna provide meals to a few households in their neighbourhood for a living, but it’s his hobby that takes up most of his time. 

“Even when I travel or visit relatives, I keep a look out for old lenses and photocopy machines which are of little use to their owners,” he says. “I bring them home for a small amount, sometimes for free. My wife, who travels more than I do, also helps me out.”