Bengalureans are quite an adventurous lot when it comes to thrilling sports activities like trekking or anything that gives an adrenalin rush.  With the state's tourism ministry constantly trying to promote its landscapes and nature spots while keeping its flora and fauna intact, Karnataka's tourism minister Priyank Kharge recently tweeted about how night trekking  is illegal in the state. He spotted night trek event listings on a popular platform, which  were to Antargange and Kunti Betta and pointed out that such events were illegal and would invite action.ADVERTISEMENTHis tweet said, "Requesting all adventure enthusiasts not to fall prey to night treks promoted by individuals or organizations. They are illegal and can be dangerous. Please use the endorsed 11 eco trails.  
#ScriptYourAdventure"  When asked more about the importance of the ban, he says, "When in forest  areas, one can never be aware of the dangers that lurk around. We have been pushing the ban on night trekking since one-and-a-half years, which is why we came out with 11 identified eco-trails and 9 jungle camps which are run through jungle lodges."  The tendency to embrace  thrill  is common, says Kharge. "It is human tendency to not want to do something which is warranted. The ban was implemented  because of safety issues. Night travel is very unpredictable and one can easily get lost. This has happened multiple times and later on forest officials have had to go looking for them," he saysKharge adds, "We need to protect our flora and fauna too. People are not responsible trekkers and the ministry  gets blamed for everything. Responsible tourism is not just a government's policy but also  has to come from individuals."  He adds, "We are not a monitoring agency and  are a promotional agency. We have 317 destinations in the state we would love to promote."Trekking community agreesMala C from Mystic Wild Pvt Ltd, who organises adventure trips and activities, says that the ban on night treks should be respected. "People should not resort to such events as they should keep in mind their own safety and respect towards nature too.  On a night trek, one is  usually on their own and in a space where you're not aware of things like at routine paths you visit. It is easy to get lost in the wild."Karnataka is home to big wild cats and sloth bears who step out after dark to hunt, she adds. "This is why the 'Path of Least Resistance' is followed through such eco-trails, where the trekking enthusiast will get an exposure to the habitat including rivers, hills and a glimpse of wildlife, while being safe."Watching the first daybreak or hitting a virgin trail always excites trekkers but sticking on endorsed routes is important, says Anirudh Kulkarni, an avid trekker. "I go with my friends and I always make sure I understand basics about the flora and fauna of the place before visiting.  It is selfish to deviate and try to make one's own path in the wild, as one could  cause irreversible damage to the ecological balance of a place," he says.Green passport"One can get their 'Green passport' by logging into www.myecotrip.com. Once you log in, you can interact
with forest officials who will guide you about how to go about a trip and will educate you about the flora and fauna of a place."
Priyank Kharge, Transport ministerMarked eco-trailsThe 11 identified ecotrails are Bhagavathi to Kurinjal Peak, Mullodi to Kudremukh Peak, Hemmadaga to Talewadi, Tadiandamol, Talacauvery to Nishani Motte, Brahmagiri, Kutiyala to Nandigunda, Makutta to Pottachipare, Abailu APC to Udambepare, Anejhari to Arashina Gundi Falls and Sitanadi to Koodlu Falls.Have they been caught yet?State Tourism Minister Priyank Kharge says, "Such events are listed from random social profiles which is
immediately deleted and the mobile number listed for contact is discarded. We haven't got a lead to the miscreants yet but we hope that none of such events pop up anymore."Rules to followIf travelling in a group, be in the pack.
Keep ample supplies with you including water and energy bars. Do not assume that you will be able to get
water from a nearby river.
Wear breezy clothes.
Pack sufficient yet light.
Avoid gadgets
Do not deviate from the trail, even for a good photograph.
Follow instructions by guards or guides.
Avoid smoking and drinking.