Summer vacations are here and everyone wants a ‘proper holiday’ – not just lazing at home but venturing away from hot and humid Delhi for a tryst with nature. 

ADVERTISEMENTHowever, not everyone necessarily has the time or money to spend on a luxurious trip to Shimla or Ooty. Thankfully, Delhi and its NCR boast of a few such places where you could easily spend a day admiring nature or even stay over for a night or two. All within Delhi/NCR and your budget. Read on:

Sultanpur bird sanctuary

Just 40 km from Dhaula Kuan, it is a bird paradise in waiting. At least 250 species can be found here at any point of the year including Common Hoopoe, Paddyfield Pipit, Purple Sunbird, Little Cormorant, Eurasian Thick-knee etc. The sanctuary has guest house facilities for general visitors, ornithologists, hideouts, watch towers, bird museum and even binoculars for hire. Entry fee: Rs 5, carrying ID proof is a must.

Asola Bhatti Wildlife 
Sanctuary

Simply speaking, it is the only existing forest in Delhi. Situated along the northern terminal of Aravalli Hill Range at Asola near Tughlaqabad, it houses about 193 species including medicinal plants, over 80 kinds of butterflies, hundreds of other insects, mammals like Blue Bull (Nilgai), Blackbuck, Black-naped Hare, Porcupine, Civets, Jackals, Jungle Cat and so on. No entry fee.

Damdama lake

Yes. There is also a lake nearby Delhi. Damdama Lake is situated on Delhi-Alwar highway at a distance of 60 km from ITO, New Delhi. It is most ideal for a day trip, corporate tour or adventure tour. There are facilities for row boats, paddle boats, motor boats, Hot Air Ballooning, Para Sailing, kayaking, rock climbing, cycling, angling, trekking and camping. No 
entry fee.

Adventure Island

Talking of amusement parks, do visit Adventure Island in Rohini. It has fun water rides like H20, Splash Dunk and Splash Down. 

H20 is most popular for its tower like structure with water sprinklers, toy guns and a mushroom shaped waterfall. One can also walk on water with water zorbing or do boating in the lagoon. Bollywood stunt shows in the evening provide live entertainment. Fee: Rs 500 
per person. 

Worlds Of Wonder

Spread over an area of 70 acres, Worlds of Wonder in Noida is divided in two zones — La Fiesta with its fun-friendly rides for families and Road Show for adrenaline junkies. The most adventurous and popular is the Rockin Roller - a three-minute-long adrenaline rush. It goes clockwise and anti- clockwise, spinning in air three times. Then there are food kiosks and the Great India Place mall to enjoy. Fee: Rs 100 for entry, Rs 450 for unlimited rides.

Heritage Village, Manesar 

Enjoy the ambience of Rajas­thani havelis at a much lesser price here. Just 50 km from Delhi, Heritage Village, Manesar provides a royal experience with all modern facilities like swimming pool, lawn tennis, billiards, bar, health club and all.

There is also live entertainment in the evening and various programmes are organised on its lush green lawns. Just a night can pep you up for days to come. Packages start from Rs 9000 per couple.