The High Court on Wednesday directed the State government to provide electricity to three localities of Shimoga, which have been deprived of power for the past 35 years. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe court was hearing a PIL petition by city-based Silicon City Welfare Society, stating that the residents of Idgah Nagar, Shantinagar and Jagpathnagar had repeatedly pleaded with the government for power supply, but the same had been denied to them.

The petition said that the residents, about 5,000 in number (500 families), were given power supply for a brief period in 2012, but it was disconnected abruptly. 

With examinations round the corner, children in these localities are finding it difficult to study. However, the counsel for Mangalore Electricity Supply Company (Mescom) submitted that these localities were on private lands, which is the reason for not supplying power.

 The Bench comprising Chief Justice D V Waghela and Justice B V Nagarathna said it is not the concern of the power supply company and directed the State to restore power supply. 

“The restoration of power is subject to the result of the writ petition, “ the Bench observed.   

VC’s appointment 

The High Court issued emergent notice to the Principal Secretary, Higher Education and Professor K S Rangappa, Vice-Chancellor, Mysore University, following a petition seeking quashing of Rangappa’s appointment as the VC.

The petitioner, Sekhar S, has said the appointment of the vice-chancellor and the procedures followed for the same were unlawful and the appointment should be quashed immediately. 

The search committee formed to suggest names to the Governor, who is the chancellor of universities, has not conducted the proceedings properly. 

In fact, there were two panels formed for the selection of VC and none of them submitted names to the Governor. The selection of the VC has been done based on the proceedings of the meeting of the search committee, which is not right, said the petitioner.

“Prof Rangappa’s candidature was dissented by Dr Thimmappa, one of the members of the search committee. The committee, instead of sending a panel of three names, has sent the proceedings with no unanimity. 

“If the appointment of Rangappa as the vice chancellor is not stayed, it will cause irreparable damage as he has already assumed office and has started taking crucial decisions, which can have far-reaching effects and would become irreversible,” the petitioner contended. 

The petition says that Thimmappa, in his dissent note, had stated that there were loopholes in the appointment of the vice chancellor. Even the consent of the State government had not been obtained before the appointment of the VC, said the petition. 
Justice S Abdul Nazeer adjourned the hearing to the last week of March.  

Transfer of elephants

The High Court on Wednesday dismissed a petition by Compassion Unlimited Plus Action (CUPA), seeking to stop the transfer of 23 elephants to Madhya Pradesh.

Hearing the petition, the division bench comprising Chief Justice D V Waghela and Justice B V Nagarathna dismissed it stating that the court cannot interfere in the matter as it pertains to the State government, Madhya Pradesh and the Union government.

The petitioners had stated that the transfer of elephants was in violation of Section 43 of the Wildlife Protection Act and a State government order banning the transportation and possession of wildlife and wildlife property. 

The petitioners had sought directions to stay the transfer of animals to Madhya Pradesh, stating that they would be used for commercial purposes.