Dried bamboo clumps being the prime reason behind the spreading of fire in both Bandipur and Nagarahole National Parks, Forest department officials from the State are planning to write a letter to the Ministry of Environment and Forest (MoEF), seeking permission to clear it, as soon as possible.

ADVERTISEMENTConfirming this to Deccan Herald, Vinay Luthra, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) said, more than 50 per cent of the area in National Parks consists of bamboo. As per the natural cycle, they wither away once in 40 years and this year all the bamboo has dried, causing a major fire threat.

He said, as both the forests — Bandipur and Nagarahole — have been declared as National Parks and tiger sanctuaries, the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) has strictly banned felling of trees or harvesting of even grass. “As per the direction, we cannot cut even a blade of grass. So, the threat from bamboo is higher. If we do not clear them, it may lead to a major catastrophe,” he added.

Luthra, who visited Bandipur National Park, has decided to write a letter to the MoEF and seek permission to clear dried bamboo. 

Officials said, sparks from bamboo, which is hollow, jumps up to 30 metres when it catches fire and is not possible to douse it easily.

Damage

Luthra, giving details about the damage at the two National Parks, said, more than 450 hectares, including 300 hectares of forest in Bandipur National Park, has turned into ashes. “However, we are confirming the exact damage in Bandipur through Satellite Imaging,” he said.

Under Bandipur National Park, Bandipur, Gopalaswamy Betta, Maddur, Omkara and Moliyur ranges have been affected. In Nagarahole National Park, some parts of the tiger reserve and Virajpet division has been damaged due to fire.

Cases registered

Meanwhile, directors of the National Parks, H C Kantharaju (Bandipur) and R Gokul (Nagarahole) have registered cases. R Gokul said, the case will be handed over to the Criminal Investigation Department.

Kantharaju said, that they have identified some suspects and they will soon be arrested.