Following heavy rains, frothy falls at Bharachukki and Gaganachukki are attracting tourists, despite absence of safety measures.

ADVERTISEMENTThousands of tourists throng Bharachukki falls in the district everyday to have a glimpse of the falls in all its glory. But, lack of safety and negligence by the authorities concerned has caused 107 deaths since 2006.

Some adventurous youth climb the hillock to reach the place from where the water falls, while others engage coracles and go closer to the falls to experience the rush of adrenaline. With heavy flow of water, there are possibilities of the coracles capsizing. Recently, five tourists from Bangalore drowned here.

Coracle operators do not provide life-saving jackets. If a boat overturns, the lives of the tourists are at risk. 

The situation is similar at Gaganachukki falls too. Geographically, the falls is situated in Malavalli taluk of Mandya district, but it can be viewed from here. Nature lovers reach the falls from behind a ‘Darga’ in the region. Moreover, the rocks are slippery due to continuous flow of water and there are possibilities of the tourists slipping into the river. There are no warning. No steps have been taken to erect a fence to prevent such mishaps.

107 killed

According to the police, 98 persons have been killed near the twin falls from the year 2006 to 2012. From January 2013 nine tourists have lost their lives. About 80 per cent of the victims are youths. 

The falls are located under Male Mahadeshwara Wildlife Sanctuary. Hence, some activities are banned. 

Committee to provide life jackets

Bharachukki Development Committee President and Assistant Commissioner H S Satish Babu said, boatmen do not provide life jackets to tourists. But they have helped save lives several times. So, the committee will provide life jackets, he said. The issue has been brought to the notice of Legal Services Committee member A N Yellappa Reddy, who visited the spot recently. As soon as it is approved, life jackets would be made mandatory, he added.