A random walk into a showroom and he fell in love with a DSLR. Next thing was to join a photography workshop with ace wildlife photographer Amoghvarsha, and investment banker Saify Naqvi turned his passion of photography into a profession.

ADVERTISEMENTNow using digital cameras and enhancements, the photographer portrays his version of ‘reality’.  Metrolife talks to the photo­grapher who has put 16 exquisite shots together for an exhibition from various trips and simply titled it Voyages. The travel enthusiast who likes to shoot both landscape and people found inspiration in Dharamsala, Ladakh, Varanasi and Delhi. “These shots were taken on my trips. Like any other traveller, I too wanted to bring back a piece of my journey.” 

The selection at Bagels Café is interesting. While photographs from a monastery where he shot Buddha of Compassion represents the spirit of Buddhism from Ladakh, the Boatman in black and white reflects ghats of Benaras. Saify says, “I work in both formats – colour and black and white but I feel that as a photographer matures, one gets more familiar with the capacity of a black and white shot. If a photograph doesn’t look miraculous in black and white then it won’t look good in colour either!” The exhibition comprises a number of sky shots with unbelievable shades of blue, yellow, grey, white and tones of black too - during sunrise and sunset. At the top, Base Tranquility, First Light, Illusion, Moon Lit and Sunset are photographs where Saify explores moods of the sky. At the top is an interesting blend of sharp yellow and blue and is shot from the highest motorable road, Khardung La. There are other masterpieces like Buddha of Compassion and Temple in the Air. 

The Buddha is a shot of an 8 inch statue that was for sale in a shop in McLeod Ganj market in Dharamsala placed amid other colourful religious paraphernalia. The Temple in the Air is a shot of Haelakh monastery situated at a distance of 45 minutes from Leh and managed by Dutch. Saify says, “On a Sunday morning at 6 am, the monastery looks as if it is emitting energy. Its location is such that is appears to be hanging in the air.”

Saify’s USP lies in his ability to capture eyes and faces. In shots such as Hope, Smoke and Sad Eyes, Saify has exce­l­led in portraying human emotions through artistic combinations. While the green in the woman’s eyes matches the green background in Hope, smoke from the bidi of the woman in Smoke matches the numer­ous wrinkles on her face. Saify says, “I shot Smoke in Delhi and was mobbed by a number of kids who wanted me to take their pictures too but somehow I could not take my eyes off the old woman and her wrinkled face.” 

The photographs are on display at outlets of Bagels Cafe in Hauz Khas Village and Gurgaon till August 20.