Stunning jewellery designed by Abaran was on display at the store. The exhibition also showcased different collections of spectacular jewellery designed by various jewellery houses from across the country.

The jewellery has been designed to bring out a powerful message – save the mighty Asiatic elephant. This was a joint initiative of Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), the World Land Trust, Gemfields, Jaguar Land Rover and GIA India. Ten jewellery houses were chosen to create unique dazzling collections that were made of Zambian emeralds, diamonds and gold. ADVERTISEMENTThe exclusive collection was unveiled by Pratap Kamath, CEO, Abaran Jewellers and will travel to each of the designer’s showroom and culminate into the auction day on October 14. The jewellery will be auctioned by Southeby’s in Mumbai, the proceeds of which will go towards the World Land Trust’s ‘Indian Elephant Corridor’ Project. This project aims to help preserve the Asian elephant’s habitat and avoid human-elephant conflict. 

Sandeep Tiwari, Head of Wild Lands Division of WTI said, “It is remarkable for the jewellers to come together and make such exquisite collections. The fact that the proceeds will go into the projects will be a great help as more people need to take heed of the problem and do something about it. The idea behind this whole exhibition is extremely thoughtful and will definitely make a big difference.”

Renowned models of the City showed off different pieces of jewellery all modelled on the elephant. The items ranged from neckpieces to earrings to bracelets, rings and even a brooch. All of the pieces had the elephant motif intricately designed into them. The other jewellers who participated were Anmol Jewellers (Mumbai), Gem Palace (Jaipur), Khanna Jewellers (New Delhi), Meena Jewellers (Hyderabad), Narayan Jewellers (Baroda), Nirav Modi (Mumbai), Sawansukha Jewellers (Kolkata), Talwarsons Jewellers (Chandigarh) and Vummidi Bangaru Jewellers (Chennai).

Showstopper and the face of the collection, model Aindrita Ray said, “This is a wonderful cause and it is so important for our country. With the elephant motif set in these jewellery pieces, it is a good way of reach out to people to help them understand the problem. This is also a good time for the exhibition as Ganesh puja is here and the women will love these designs.”