With the focus on the intricate art of filmmaking and demystifying the various procedures, Apeejay Stya University recently organised its second edition of ‘Film Week’ to pay tribute to Indian Cinema and its vast array of talented filmmakers. 

ADVERTISEMENTPresent at the event was award-winning film director, Nila Madhava Panda.The theme of the event this time was ‘100 years of Indian Cinema and Wildlife Cinema’. 

The highlight of the event was a session with Nila Madhava Panda, the director of the film I am Kalam, who shared his experience with the students. Many wildlife films were also screened during the festival in association with CMS Vatavaran, the organisers of the largest film festivals in South Asia on 
environment, bio-diversity and wild life.

The weekly film festival is a part of the yearly series of events organised by the School of Journalism and Mass Communication (SJMC), Apeejay Stya University (ASU) including Radio Week and Print Week. Various award winning films like Gravity, Nebraska and Prisoners, I am Kalam, among many others were screened at the festival.

According to professor Pervaiz Alam, Dean of SJMC, ASU, “As filmmaking is an integral part of the students’ curriculum, we thought of creating an event where students not only get a chance to watch the best of world cinema, but also get a chance to interact with noted personalities from the film industry.”

Speaking after the event, Nila Madhava Panda said, “India, despite being the largest producer of feature films in the world, is not making enough quality films for its young audience.” Addressing the students of the University, he urged the young filmmakers to accept the challenge and make quality films for 
the children.

The students also gave a presentation on 100 years of Indian Cinema. Overall, it was an enriching experience for the students. Latika Arora, a final year student of School of Journalism and Mass Communication, said, “It was a very helpful event for all of us. We got to learn about  the different angles of shooting a scene, direction, etc.

 Madhav Sir also shared his personal experience of shooting a film which we can all incorporate in our professional life. He also explained to us how to build story ideas.”