I had the opportunity to visit Aizawl with two of my friends to conduct a training.ADVERTISEMENTWe wanted to make most of our business trip, so we made a few plans.The first thing that struck me was the pristine scenery, disciplined traffic (despite narrow roads and heavy traffic).Being a vegetarian, food was not a problem; the staple diet for a vegetarian is puri and potato baji, while pork and beef are served in different forms for people who like to indulge in non-vegetarian dishes.Women are seen in every shop, whether it is in pharmacies, selling vegetables, groceries, and hotels, to name a few.We decided to visit some places apart from going to the local market.Reiek Tlang is 1600 meters and is one of the highest hills in Mizoram. It is located around 35 km from Aizawl. You can only trek there but the visual sights in the forest of Reiek hills are excellent. The lush green temperate forest is home to a wide range of wildlife, primarily hill birds like the rare Peregrine falcon.There is a government lodge where one can stay, we had an excellent meal of simple food of roti, dhal, rice and a vegetable. Solomon Temple is located in Kidron Valley and the foundation of the temple was laid on December 23, 1996.Apparently, the temple cost USD 3 million and the intention was to reconstruct the original destroyed Solomon’s temple in Jerusalem.History says that in 1991 Dr Sailo (the man who spearheaded the initiative) is said to have received “instructions” from The Holy Spirit in a dream asking him to construct the temple.The site of the temple was chosen in West Aizawl, previously known as Chawlhhmun.The is name is now changed to Kidron Valley. Hmuifang Tiang is another beautiful and stunning hill station that is located around 50 km from Aizawl. It is located 5,000 feet above sea level and is known for its picturesque surroundings. Durtlang Hills is located to the north of Aizawl. The peak serves as a spotting place where you oversee the city. In one minute, you see the dotted city and in another you see only fluffs of clouds which just floats over the city creating a curtain over the city.  Vantawang Falls is the highest waterfall in the state and the 13th highest in the country. Due to dense forest areas surrounding it, one can only view it from a distance.
The author can be contacted on (annapoornaravichander@gmail.com)