Photography

Wide lens 
ADVERTISEMENT‘Jewels of the Wild’, a wildlife photography exhibition by a father-son duo Vinod Goel and Bharat Goel opens at the India Habitat Centre today and will continue till February 24. The exhibition showcases 28 impressive, life-size photos from across various sanctuaries and national parks in India, revealing the stunning natural jewels of our country. The photos have been taken by the father-son duo over a period of five years.

From Assam
A photography exhibition ‘An Assamese Voyage’ is on display at Gallery Trapezoid, South Extension II, till February 29 from 11 am to 7 pm. The exhibition by Prabir Purkayastha displays the ancient Assamese culture and its people. For details call: 41044663.

Love of art
The exhibition ‘The Resilience of Unheard Voices: Armed Conflict and Women in Northeast India’ by Kausiki Sarma will be available from February 18 to 24 at Galerie Romain Rolland, Alliance Francaise de Delhi. The compilation of photographs is a product of two separate projects based in North-East India, in which the artist was engaged as a photographer. For details call: 43500200.

Art

Master work
Art aficionados are in for a big treat. The works of master artists like FN Souza, Ram Kumar, Sakti Burman, MF Hussain and others will be on display at an exhibition titled ‘Master’s Strokes’ at the Art Elements Gallery, Hauz Khas Village till February 29, from 11 am to 7.30 pm. For more details call: 26534947.

Expressing emotions
‘Catharsis: Stream to Purgation’, a painting exhibition will be presented at Creativity Art Gallery, Lado Sarai, till February 20 from 11 am to 7 pm. The show features work of artists like Haku Sah, Amit Ambalal, Jeram Patel, Raghav Kanaria, Ratilal Kansodariya and Vinod Shah. 

Canvas speak
Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) presents ‘Essence of Stones Captured on Canvas’ art exhibition by Kumar Vikas Saxena. The exhibition will begin today evening at 6.30 pm and continue till February 22 at Azad Bhavan Art Gallery. Entry will be free. For more details call: 23379310.


Music

Classical notes
Enjoy ‘Basant Bahar’ khayal and thumri recital by Anjana Nath, disciple of Meera Banerjee, Lalit Mohan Sanyal and Pandit Ajoy Chakraborty. Anjana will present a concert series today at India Habitat Centre, 7 pm onwards. 

Music mania 
Plok, a five-member band will play for the first time at Turquoise Cottage, Vasant Vihar. Listen to their unusual genre of music on February 19 from 8 pm. Entry is free for all. 

Scratch and enjoy
DJ Cheenu and DJ Amit will churn out some whacky music to make you dance all night. For some groovy music on ‘Friday Retro Night’ visit Smoke House Grill, Greater Kailash-II today, 9.30 pm onwards. Entry is by registration only.

Audio treat
Naad Aura Musical Odyssey presents Pandit Chhote Lal Misra Abhinandan Samaroh, Pakhawaj recital by Dr Anil Choudheri, disciple of Pandit Ramashish Pathak. The performance will be followed by a Hindustani vocal recital by Uma Garg. The event will take place at India Habitat Centre on February 19, 7 pm onwards.

Vocal expression
‘Gharana Parampara’, a three-day international festival of Indian classical vocal and Ustad Chand Khan award conferment event will be organised at India Islamic Culture Centre, Lodhi Road, today at 6 pm. Entry will be by invitation or passes available at the venue and Azad Bhavan, IP Estate. For more details call: 9891943039.
 
Musical magic
An evening of musical delight awaits Delhiites as sarod player Ayaan Ali Khan will perform at Azad Bhavan Auditorium on February 19, 6 pm onwards. For more details call: 9899903415. 


POTPOURRI 

Managing disaster
Indian Institute for Human Settlements (IIHS) is organising a five-day course on ‘Integrated Urban Disaster Risk Reduction’. The course aims to highlight and analyse the current disaster risks and will introduce participants to develop effective processes for awareness planning in order to improve disaster and recovery activities. The course will begin on February 24, 9.30 am onwards at IIHS on Kasturba Gandhi Marg. For more details call: 9740220875.


Festive spirit
‘Celebrating the North-East’, a festival of music and photography is being organised at Main Building, India International Centre from February 18, 4 pm onwards. For more details call: 24619431.
Discourse time
The first e-retailing congress is being organised by India Holdings Ltd on February 20 where industry experts will chalk out various business strategies. The event will be held at Hotel Claridges from 10 am to 6 pm.

Quiz time
The first edition of ‘Landmark Quiz’ is being organised at Kamani Auditorium, Copernicus Marg, on February18. The quiz will be hosted by veteran quiz master Dr Navin Jaya Kumar. To participate, register at Landmark, Ambience Mall, Vasant Kunj and Landmark, DLF Grand Mall, Gurgaon. For more details call: 64641719 or 124-6462963.  

Theatre

Stage feast 

A five-day Punjabi Theatre Festival is being organised by Punjabi Academy at Shri Ram Centre from February 20 onwards. Plays based on the work of Rabindranath Tagore will be a major attraction of the festival. Plays by renowned dramatists, including Dr Atamjit, Pali Bhupinder Singh, Kewal Dhaliwal, Dr Charan Das Siddhu, Ravi Taneja and Neelam Mansingh Chaudhary, will also be staged during the festival. For more details call: 23714307.

Uncut performance
Fish Eye Films and Theatre Group present a Hindi play Ohh  No at Alliance Francaise, Lodhi Road, on February 19 at 4 pm and 7 pm. Ohh No is an Indo-American play which reflects the change of generation and its affects on one's life. Entry will be through tickets available at the venue. 

Laugh away
Desires Unlimited, an alumni group of Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Delhi, presents an English comedy play Jai & Juliet on February 18 and 19 at National Cooperative Union of India (NCUI) Auditorium, August Kranti Marg. The play will be staged at 7 pm on February 18 and at 4.30 pm and 7.30 pm on February 19. For tele-bookingcall: 39895050. 

Film

Screen magic
‘The Writing Irish’ an Irish film festival is currently being held at India Habitat Centre. The festival is a celebration of various Irish writers with screen adaptations of works by James Joyce, William Trevor, Brian Friel and Samuel Beckett. Films will be screened at 7 pm today evening and on February 18, 20 and 21. For more details call: 43663333.