Wildlife photography is a glamourous field. As interesting as it looks from outside, it’s gritty and tough from inside. 

ADVERTISEMENTRajesh Kumar Das will vouch for this. A final-year BCom student of MS Ramaiah College of Arts, Science and Commerce, Rajesh always takes time out for his passion — wildlife photography! “I love taking pictures of wildlife more than portraits or street photography as it helps me enjoy life,” he says. 

Rajesh says that his passion for photography came from his father. “He loves taking pictures too. In fact, I still have the old camera that he would use. It is 27 years old!” he notes. 

Recalling his childhood  days when he wanted to be a part of the school photography club but couldn’t get in, he says, “Once we all went on a tour and I took my point-and-shoot camera along. I clicked some pictures, which somehow got leaked. Much to my surprise, these pictures were displayed by the same club at the annual day of our school.” 

He even won a photography contest organised by the BMS College of Engineering. “I just took part for the experience but when I won it, I was pleasantly surprised,” he says. He shoots during the weekends and sometimes even does night photography at various places in the City. 

 “I haven’t done any course in photography. But I follow a number of great photographers online who give me useful tips. So that way, I am learning new skills,”  says Rajesh.  According to him, budding photographers should be active on social media.   
There are a number of challenges in the field, he explains. “Sometimes, we have to wait for weeks or even months to get the right shot,” he notes. “Once I remember hiding under an umbrella for a long time to click a bird,” he laughs. He recently bought his first DSLR and has been spending time at places in and around Bangalore like Nandi Hills, Hesaraghatta and Bannerghatta National Park. He plans to visit Bandipur and Nagarhole National Parks soon too.
 “My next destination for now is Ranganthittu Bird Sanctuary,” he informs. Rajesh also plans to work for a year and pursue photography at the same time once he graduates. “You need to camp at various national parks to get the right click for which you need  cash. So my plan for now is to graduate and work for a year to collect money,” he adds. “But photograph is my passion and it is what I enjoy doing.”