This year, there seems to be a few positive developments on the tourism front in Mysuru, as the World Tourism Day coincides with the Dasara festivities.

Even as the Tourism department is involved in holding the first ever ‘Open Street Festival’ on the D Devaraj Urs Road on Wednesday, to mark the day, Mysuru-Kodagu MP Pratap Simha has urged Union Minister of state for Tourism K J Alphons to include Mysuru in the list of 12 cities, slated to be developed as major tourist destinations of India.

The Union Tourism department is identifying 12 tourist destinations, across the country, for holistic development of those cities and Simha has recommend Mysuru to be included in the list. In this connection, the MP has put forth a proposal before the Tourism ministry.

“Mysuru is the cultural, knowledge and tourism capital of Karnataka with a salubrious climate. The city is located 139 kms south west of Bengaluru and accounts for the highest tourist arrivals in Karnataka. There are a score of important sites within a radius of 50 to 80 kms, encapsuling historical, archaeological, cultural and wildlife sites, exploring which takes at least a week. 

It is also an ideal base to explore the beauty of the Western Ghats (Kodagu, 110 kms), sculptural beauty in Belur-Halebid (110 km) and Shravanabelagola (80 km) which are in the tentative list of the UNESCO World Heritage Sites,” he has stated.

“Mysuru city, on a conservative basis, attracts 3.5 million tourists annually, based on the number of tickets sold at the Mysuru Palace and the presumption that most tourists visiting Mysuru for the first time make it a point to visit the palace. This number of visitors is more than the total number of visitors to Agra Fort and Taj Mahal, if non-ticketed entries are also taken into account. Based on the number of ticketed entries, Mysuru Palace (3.5 million) is the third most visited monument (non-religious) in India after Agra Fort (4.71 million) and Taj Mahal (4.15 million),” Simha points out.

Appended with many sobriquets, as the city of sandalwood and incense sticks to the ‘City of Palaces’, Mysuru is referred to as a heritage city since there are nearly 200 listed heritage structures. It is also the yoga capital with nearly 150 yoga institutions, drawing foreign students in large numbers, he adds.

The MP has suggested some specific measures for the holistic development of the tourist destinations around Mysuru. He has recommended upgrading of the Brindavan Gardens to provide laser, sound and light show with themes and also construction of a food court.

“Rangayana – Karnataka’s theatre repertoire – should be converted into an ‘Activity Centre’, with cultural activities going on, till the late night. Heritage night tours, with all heritage buildings having good outdoor lightings, should be introduced. Sandalwood and silk products and their production process should be promoted. Spruced up tonga service with trained drivers should be available throughout the year. Mysuru walks, multi-lingual, multimedia shows should be started.

“A hi-resolution photo gallery, depicting the history of Mysuru from ancient to contemporary times, should be established. Hop-on and hop-off bus circuits should be deployed while adventure sports should be promoted,” he said.

ADVERTISEMENT