Giving convention and seniority a go-by, state government has appointed a junior rank officer as a Chief Wildlife Warden.

The decision to appoint Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) C Jayaram, as Chief Wildlife Warden instead of PCCF Punati Sridhar has not gone down well with senior officials and conservationists.   

The Chief Wildlife Warden is appointed by the government as per section 4(1)(a) of Wildlife Protection Act, 1972.

So far, it was a post held by PCCF (Wildlife) who is the head of the wildlife wing in the forest department. 

The post was vacant for the last one year after B J Hosmath retired. His successor P Anur Reddy was not given the post officially. 

On the eve of Thursday’s reshuffle and expansion of council of ministers, Forest Minister B Ramanath Rai appointed Jayaram as Chief Wildlife Warden. Sources said the minister was under pressure from the Chief Ministers Office (CMO) to downgrade post and appoint Jayaram.  

This decision has already created a rift and confusion among officials. “We now do not know who we should report to. According to the Act, chief wildlife warden is the supreme authority, but PCCF is higher in ranking,” the official said.

Avani Kumar Verma, former PCCF said that it is very surprising that the government has downgraded the post of CWW. This move will create two power centres, which is not good, he said.

B K Singh, also a retired PCCF said the government could have handled the situation better by shifting the PCCF to another post and then making APCCF the Chief Wildlife Warden. This shows lack of expertise and concern on the part of the government.

However, Jayaram assured that there will be no problem and said he will work in coordination with PCCF-wildlife. “This is the government’s decision and they can appoint anyone. The PCCF will continue to be the administrative head and I will work under the limitation of Chief Wildlife Warden and APCCF,” Jayaram said.

‘Political meddling’
“Such blunders happen when mindless politicians interfere and take decisions in haste. There are many instances where politicians have interfered. Appointing Rana George, son of Bengaluru Development Minister. 

K J George as chairman of state wildlife board is a striking example. Recently, the government appointed S P Sheshadri, convener of Marikamba Temple Charitable Trust, Shivamogga as Karnataka State Biodiversity Board chairman,” said a forest officer seeking anonymity.ADVERTISEMENT