Hanumanthappa of Badami taluk in Bagalkot has seen a tiger only twice in his lifetime. He is neither used to the harshness of the wilderness nor has he grown up learning anything about the wild cat.  

ADVERTISEMENTYet, he vouches to do all in his might to protect the beast from being poached or attacked. Not only has he forsaken his personal life for this purpose, he has also undertaken an intense regime for the last one and half years, trying to equip himself with the best of skills to tackle the unfriendly situations in the wild.

Come January, Hanumanthappa becomes one of the 54 State Forest department personnel to be part of the prestigious Special Tiger Protection Force (STPF), which has been put together to keep a watchful eye on the 300-odd felines spread across four Tiger Reserves in the State.

Commando training

After receiving basic training in wildlife management, this company of 40 forest guards and 14 deputy rangers has become the first in the country to receive the elite commando training, which is part of the training module set by the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA).

For the last five weeks, this company has been learning skills like intelligence collection, carrying out ambush and raid operations, karate, judo, map reading, apart from training to become expert armed combats.

The training, which is being imparted by the Karnataka State Reserve Police (KSRP) at its training camp at Kudlu on Sarjapur Road in Bangalore, has personnel being groomed to handle the latest specialised weaponry, including the 5.56 mm assault rifle Insas.  

Apart from Insas, they will be handling self loading rifles (SLRs) and light machine guns (LMGs) on the field.

P C Hiremath, Commandant of KSRP, said that in the five weeks, the company was also trained by the bomb squad.

“They were trained in night navigation and firing, they are being taught how to use and launch grenades, conduct combing operations, apart from detecting tiger traps and removing them before any harm is caused to the wildlife. What is unique about the commando training is the everyday routine where the personnel have to perform 18 tough tasks, which include crawling, climbing, balancing and weaving.”

Hiremath said this was the first time KSRP was imparting commando training to a non-police force. He added that the theory and practicals taught were based on syllabus set by NTCA.

Hanumanthappa told Deccan Herald that he was thrilled at the prospect of receiving such specialised training. 

“Karnataka prides itself for its tigers. We have the highest population of tigers, but the fact is that the number of poachers is also on the rise. I will do everything in my capacity to protect the tigers – even if it means sacrificing my life. To protect the creatures, we need systematic training, which has been provided to us. 

Not only have we learnt to conduct raids on poachers, use maps and GPS, we have also learnt discipline, an aspect which was lacking in our basic training module,” he said.

B J Hosmath, Field Director, Project Tiger, Karnataka said once the personnel finished their last leg of training, they would be deployed on the field. The first batch will man three areas – Malekamanahalli in Bandipur, Thithimathi in Nagarhole and Handpost in H D Kote.

The company of 54 will be divided into three platoons of 18 members each, he said.
“The total strength of the company is 112. We are also in the process of recruiting 21 guards and four foresters next year. In the next two months, 27 watchers will be selected from the tribal areas,” he added.

Tiger poaching

As per the Wildlife Conservation Society statistics, as many as 48 tigers have died in the wild between January 2006 and October 2011. Of these, 25 tigers have succumbed to poaching. Karnataka is home to five Tiger Reserves - Bandipur, Nagarhole, Anshi-Dandeli, Bhadra and B R Hills.