"If the census is done scientifically then it will surely prove existence of tigers here," Rajendra Kerkar, who brought to light tiger hunting near Mhadei Wildlife Sanctuary last year told reporters. The exercise, that will begin next month, will be carried out by department personnel, wildlife experts and volunteers, a senior Forest Department official said.

The counting, modelled on the methodology adopted by Dehradun-based Wildlife Institute of India (WII), is expected to support green activists who demand the forests in Goa to be declared tiger reserves to protect the habitat of the endangered wild animal and keep mining firms out, Kerkar said.

Kerkar said protection of sanctuaries like Mhadei, Netravali and Bhagwan Mahaveer would provide continuous corridor to wild animals. "This corridor will cover Bhimgad Wildlife Sanctuary of Maharashtra, Dandeli Sanctuary, Anshi National Park, certain areas of forest adjoining Tillari in Maharashtra and Radhanagari forests," he added.ADVERTISEMENTAn NGO, Mission Green, had recently sent a petition to Prime Minister Manmohan Singh seeking his intervention to declare Goa’s wildlife sanctuaries as tiger reserves. The e-petition, signed by various individuals, was sent to Union Environment and Forests Minister Jairam Ramesh as well. 

Almost 50 per cent of Goa is in forest area. Recently, a tiger was killed in Mhadei Wildlife Sanctuary basin and the authorities said they had spotted indications of a tigress and a cub existing in the sanctury. The 2002 census had counted four tigers in Goa based on pugmarks and other related signs of the wild beast.

The next census, in 2006, could not yield results about their number as it was conducted with new methodology and WII is yet to compile the results. Kerkar said the wildlife activists were hoping that the ensuing animal counting would put to rest all vagueness about existence of tigers in the tourist state.

"The census will be an actual assessment of animals and their habitat. We will be able to map exactly what's the trend within the sanctuaries and whether there is enough food available for them," a wildlife sanctuary officer in Goa said.