Mantri Square Mall launched the ‘Mantri Square Green Calendar’ for the year 2012.

 ADVERTISEMENTThe launch is an initiative taken by Mantri Square along with Pratham Books, a not-for-profit children’s book publisher. 

The sale proceeds of the calendar will go towards buying story books for less privileged children of the Indus International Community School and other Government schools.
 
The calendar was launched by Snehal Mantri,  Director Marketing of Mantri Developers Pvt Ltd. 
It also has illustrations of paintings by kids who participated in a drawing contest at the mall and those organised by Pratham Books.
 
The theme of the drawing competition was ‘Forests and Wildlife’, which added vibrant colours to the calendar. At the launch, Snehal Mantri, Director Marketing of Mantri Developers Pvt Ltd said, “We at Mantri Square are committed to fulfill our responsibilities towards our society.

 The launch of this calendar is a humble attempt towards achieving this goal, as we understand the importance of education in the lives of children.”

Other dignitaries present at the launch were Kanchan Banerjee, Trustee, Pratham Books.
 
“Pratham Books is extremely glad to be part of the launch of this calendar. Through our low cost, high quality books available in English and many Indian languages, we hope to make reading a joyful experience which will not only help expand the horizons of many children, but also make them more aware of the gifts of nature and their responsibility to conserve those gifts.”

Printed on eco-friendly paper, this calendar features art work giving out the message of ‘Awareness Today for a Greener Tomorrow’ campaign initiated by Pratham Books. It can be used to mark dates for positive conservation activities like planting a sapling, watering plants and many more. 

The calendar initiative inspires people to take up environmental causes and shares green facts and stories for environmental education.

Jonathan Yach, Chief Executive Officer of Mantri Square, said, “It has always been Mantri Square’s priority to provide the best services in contributing to the society.

 Our association with Pratham Books has given us this opportunity to extend our hands towards working for this noble cause. 

Recognising children’s talent this way, I believe will bring out the best in them.”