Along with researchers and scientists, citizens from across the country who watch birds can now contribute to an all-India bird census titled - Great Backyard Bird Count in India (GBBC).ADVERTISEMENT
The Bombay Natural History Society (BNHS) has organised a survey from February 13 to 16, with an aim to find out how birds are adapting to changing lifestyles, for example, how birds like sparrows, crows and kites are dealing with the human habitation and feeding; how migratory birds have adapted to changing seasons and polluted water bodies; and how birds are competing with other birds vis-a-vis in feeding, building nests and breeding. 
The study focusses on the change in bird population, their habitats and food habits in key urban cities like Bengaluru. 

BNHS Communications Manager Atul Sathe said, as part of the survey, people will have to observe birds in their backyard, balcony, garden, on the roadside, in parks, streets near offices or homes, fields, forests or anywhere for at least 15 minutes a day. 

Then note the species, the number of birds, timings, exact geographic location, season and upload it on the website www.ebird.org. People can also upload photographs and videos. 

There is no limit to the list of birds which one can upload, he added.

A similar study was done last year too, where over 1,000 bird enthusiasts participated and over 800 species of birds were recorded. The idea of involving the public is to cover a larger geographic area, which is not possible by researchers and scientists alone. 

To sight rare birds

This year, the aim is to involve over a lakh bird enthusiasts from across the globe for the study and get an account of some rare birds too like Baikal Teal and Blue-naped Pitta. Over 30 educational campuses across India have signed up for the campus bird count.

Experts feel confident about the outcome this time. Dr Asad Rahmani, Director, BNHS-India, said the GBBC is an exciting opportunity for all nature enthusiasts in the country to help document India’s birds. Proper documentation is important for long-term conservation planning for birds.

Dr V B Mathur, Director, Wildlife Institute of India, opined that the information generated from such activities can be used to monitor the population trends of various species.
DH News Service