Nothing excites wildlife photographer and cinematographer Saravana Kumar more than filming wild animals in their natural habitat. Little wonder then that his photographs and films on wildlife have won critical acclaim the world over, writes  Hema Vijay

 Summer at the Tadoba forest near Nagpur in Maharashtra can get dry and scalding. ADVERTISEMENTEspecially so, if you have to wait it out in an open jeep — hour after hour and day after day, doing nothing, waiting hopefully for a tiger to show up in front of you. 
“It was becoming tense out there. There we were, shooting a film on the tiger, and we had hardly had a tiger sighting even after three weeks of camping there,” reminisces Chennai-based S U Saravana Kumar, talented wildlife photographer and cinematographer, whose films are now being aired around the world. “In Africa, we are allowed to drive into the forest, here we have to stick to the road network,” he informs. 
Eventually, at Tadoba, luck turned around by the end of the third week. A tiger call was heard from the winding roads ahead of the reservoir beside which Saravana Kumar’s jeep was parked. “Hearing it, the other jeeps moved ahead towards the spot, but we decided to stay. My forest tracker, Neelkant, had a hunch that the tiger would move towards us.” And the tiger did show up. Saravana Kumar ended up shooting two hours of non-stop tiger footage, and this went on to make 25 per cent of the film. “It was a marvelous sight. The tiger came out, swam across the reservoir and made scent markings,” he shares. “Filming wildlife is like that. Very often, it can be frustrating. But when you do catch a wild animal in action in its natural setting, you feel privileged.”
This film, Tiger Jungles, made for National Geographic Channel, is positioned chronologically in summer, when there is a struggle for water. The film captures how tough it gets for prey animals to get access to water during summer, since predators like lions settle themselves down by the watering holes. By now, Saravana Kumar has delighted wildlife enthusiasts with his cinematography that includes films on Gir lions, the mad elephants of Assam, snake bite victims in Kerala, and the villages alongside the Sunderbans, to name a few. “It takes 50 days in the wild to film footage for an hour long wildlife film,” he informs. “We try to predict, but we don’t know for sure if the animals will come out and show themselves. About 20 to 30 per cent of the outcome depends on luck.”
Being ready to receive
Often, reality is nothing like what we imagine it to be. It can be a little disillusioning, especially if you think that making a career out in the wild makes for an adventurous life, packed with action. The truth is, it is about waiting patiently, and making calculated choices. “You have to be quiet and unobtrusive. It is about being ready to receive, rather than take control of things. If you intrude or interfere, you no longer have the shot, because wildlife film is about wildlife as it is, not wildlife as we want it. When things happen in the jungle, they happen very fast; until then, you have to keep waiting in a semi-alert state; you can’t even settle down to read a book, or you might miss the shot. 
Eventually, you learn to wait, and your mind starts reflecting on life. It is almost like meditation,” Saravana Kumar says, adding, “Spending so many hours on reflection ends up giving you a blanket of peace, and it makes you a very self-contained person.”
The wildlife filmmaker’s day starts at dawn. “At dawn, the forest comes alive and light is at its best,” he says. Being a biologist helps. This photographer happens to have a master’s degree in wildlife biology from the Dehradun-based Wildlife Institute of India, which takes in just 14 science graduates every two years for its master’s course in wildlife science. He had earlier completed his graduation in zoology from Chennai’s Loyola College. Even during his undergraduate days, Saravana Kumar was keen on wildlife biology and did research studies for the World Wide Fund for Nature. While at the Dehradun institute, Saravana Kumar got hooked to wildlife filming and conservation. 
“Knowing animal behaviour helps in predicting as well as filming important facets,” he says. “I know where to go looking for animals and identify their calls. But of course, without local forest trackers, I would be lost,” he says. To dispel another myth, there are not too many dangerous encounters in the wild, unless you step out of track. “Animals don’t start chasing you, unless you corner or get too close to them, or irritate them, or if they have young ones. Otherwise, their natural instinct is to move away,” he says.

Wildlife into the future 
“A good photographer has to be technically sound, but after a certain level, the camera doesn’t matter,” says this wildlife chronicler. He no longer researches on wildlife, with the lure of the camera growing stronger now. Fine-art nature photography has him in its sway now. However, next on the anvil is a film on man eating leopards. “Getting permits is the toughest part,” he remarks. He does advertising photography — mostly on bikes and fashion from time to time. “That is to satisfy the need to be in control of the photograph. With wildlife, you take images, rather than make them.” 
Right now, Saravana Kumar is back at his studio in Chennai, and a rare sight greets visitors stepping in. Not images of tigers or lions, but a live and real, sacred vilvam tree laden with its spherical green fruits that overwhelms the space; the studio is glassed entirely on one face to allow the tree to create the room’s atmosphere — it is a little like bringing home the jungle.
Incidentally, the first time that Saravana Kumar set foot in a jungle was during his final year of under graduation, and the first time he clicked an image — with a small Pentax camera — was to complete his dissertation project for his master’s degree. “I thoroughly enjoyed being in the forest, and realised I wanted to be out in the wild,” he says. So the next year found the young man sitting back at home, teaching himself photography by reading books and experimenting. “I survived by doing the few assignments which came my way from the Wildlife Institute, and by assisting friends like cinematographer Alphons Roy on photo shoots,” he shares. “I didn’t know how far I would go, but I knew that I wanted a life out in the wild.” 
As for the future of wildlife, it lies in the restoration of forests, feels this cinematographer. He points out to efforts like the one happening in Walparai, Coimbatore, where some of his friends (under the name Nature Conservation Foundation) have settled down and started restoring the patches of deforested land between tea estates. “That place now has the original indigenous flora of the area, and insects, birds and some small mammals too. Wildlife has amazing resilience. If we can give them space, they can survive.”