Drama

Cheers to God

It’s a perfect chance to have rendezvous with God, where you will find answers to very crucial and grave aspects and issues of life and mankind. Upcoming play When God said Cheers! is all set to be staged in the City. It revolves around an ordinary man (Cyrus. F. Dastur) and God (Tom Alter) and connects instantly because of the human nature of wanting to discuss our problems with someone superior and point a finger to someone when things don’t work. It has been written by filmmaker Anurag Kashyap. Venue:  Hotel Country Inn and Suites by Carlson, Chattarpur Road, on February 10. Time: 12:30 pm and 1:30 pm. 

Fantasies meet realities

5Elementz Art & Culture Society presents a Hindi play Dayashankar ki Dairy directed by Rakhi Manuv. Its a story of man, Dayashankar who lives in his world, where fantasies and realities merge till the point they become inseparable. Venue: PSK Auditorium, Laxmi Nagar, Vikas Marg, on February 8. Time: 6: 30 pm. For details call  9313702251 and 9811445355.

Other side

If you love watching plays, then this is the place for you to be. Join in at Akshara Theatre where you get a chance to watch Kasturba Panda ki Pantie. Adapted and directed by Madhav ‘MadDawg’ Mehta, the play is a solo performance starring Farhad ‘KingBawa’ Colabavala and explores the state of a modern, conservative, married Indian woman in Delhi. Venue: Akshara Theatre, Baba Kharak Singh Marg, on February 14 to 17 and 27 to 24. Time: 8 pm and 4 pm on February 17 and 24. Entry is by tickets available on www.bookmyshow.com. For details call 9873514351. 

Youth brigade

Sahitya Kala Parishad brings ‘Yuva Natya Samaroh 2013’, featuring a range of plays by young actors and directors. A total of eight plays will be staged during the festival. Bada Natakia Kaun, Pratigya Yogandhrayad, Khamosh – Aadalat Jaari Hain, Aadhe Adhoore are some of them. Venue: Shri Ram Centre, Mandi House, from February 11 to 15 and 18 to 21. Time: 6: 30 pm. 

Entry is free. 

Photography

Ladakh hues

Ladakh is not just another hill station destination. Shamim Akhtar’s photography exhibition  ‘Ladakh hues’ celebrates the ancient civilisation that the Leh region is. The technique used in this body of work is Monochrome Infra- Red Photography. The photographer says ‘infra-Red photography is nothing new, but very few photographers have been able to achieve perfection in this form. The technical difficulty makes this not so practiced by many. It has taken more than 20 years for him also to understand this medium. Venue: India Habitat Centre (IHC), Lodhi Road, from February 8 to 16. Time: 10:30 am to 6: 30 pm. Entry is free. 

Group show

Mathew Kurien, A Delhi-based graphic designer is showcasing his work along with several talented photographers, in a group exhibition ‘Timeless’. It presents the works of five photographers, each with his own unique story and signature style. The collection spans a range of subjects. From wildlife and serene landscapes to the burst of colours at Holi, from mundane scenes of daily life elevated to the extraordinary to quirky masterpieces where the subject disappears, this show invites viewers to weave their own interpretation of the images on display. ADVERTISEMENTVenue: Lalit Kala Academy, Mandi House, till February 12. Time: 11 am to 7 pm. 
Entry is free.  

Dance

Young talent

AAMAD Kathak Dance Centre presents ‘Pratibha Utsav’, a dance festival of young talent. Venue:  M.L. Bhartia Auditorium, Alliance Francaise De Delhi,  Lodhi Estate, on February 6. Time: 6 pm. Entry is free and seating on first come first served 
basis. 

Cultural evening

Enjoy a cultural evening with an Odissi dance performance by Sharon Lowen. Sharon has dedicated her life to presenting and promoting excellence in Indian performing arts. She is hailed today as one of the leading international performing artists of three forms of Indian dance: Odissi, Chhau and Manipuri. The evening will also feature tabla solo by Neetu Chopra and ghazals by Guru Vinod Kumar and Dr Kiran Martin. The event is a part of celebration of 25 years of Asha Community Health and Development Society. Venue: Shri Satya Sai Auditorium, Pragati Vihar, Lodhi Road, on February 8. Time: 6:30 pm.

For the Ganga

A contemporary choreographer and Mohiniattam dancer, Brigitte Chataigner presents  ‘Ganga’, a choreographic piece uniting poetry, music and dance. Nourished by both Indian and Western choreographic influences, this piece tries to reveal the essential values not only of the Ganga but also of water, and women. Venue: M.L. Bhartia Auditorium, Alliance Francaise, Lodhi Estate, on February 9 and 10. Time: 6 pm. 
Entry is free. 

Bharatanatyam recital 

Delhi Tamil Sangam along with Ganesa Natyalaya presents ‘Tri Nayan’, a Bharatanatyam presentation by Saroja Vaidyanathan, Rama Vaidyanathan and Dakshina Vaidyanathan. Venue: Delhi Tamil Sangam, Tamil Sangam Marg,  R K Puram, on February 9. Time: 6: 30 pm. Entry is free. 

Films

Bad blood

French film Mauvais Sang (Bad Blood) with English subtitles will be showcased. The story is set in Paris, where aging thieves Marc and Hans owe money to a tough American woman who gives them two weeks to pay. They scheme to steal and sell a new serum for a disease that’s killing lovers, but they need someone with quick steady hands. It’s been directed by Leos Carax. 

Venue: M.L. Bhartia Auditorium, Alliance Francaise, on February 8. Time: 5:30 pm and 7:30 pm. Entry is free and seating on first come first served basis. 

Engrossing

From the Goya Awards film series, a Spanish film No rest for the wicked will be screened in the City. Directed by Emilio Martínez Lázaro, the film is about a police inspector Santos Trinidad who gets involved in a triple murder case, but there is a witness that manages to escape and could incriminate him. Venue: Instituto Cervantes, on February 10. Time: 4: 30 pm. Entry is free and seating on first come first served basis. 

Valentine special

This Valentine’s Day relive the yesteryear romance created by Yash Chopra on screen. PVR pays tribute to the greatest king of romance by showcasing the most romantic flicks like Kabhi Kabhie, Silsila, Lamhe, Veer Zaara and more. 
Venue: PVR multiplexes across the City, from February 8 to 14. Time: evening slot. 
Entry by tickets available at the venue. 

Making of Gandhi

SPICMACAY presents Making of the Mahatma film screening. The movie is about the early life of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi (Mahatma Gandhi). The film is being screened as part of the cultural society’s Virasat Festival. Venue: Maulana Azad Medical College Complex, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, on February 9. Time: 1:30 pm. Entry is free. 

Art

Without objects

Can art exist without objects? Seemingly it can, an art studio in the City presents a group show titled ‘Exhibition Without Objects’ that has been curated by US-based Pakistani curator Sadia Shirazi. The participating artists are Ayesha Jatoi, Mehreen Murtaza, Rabbya Naseer, Hurmat Ul Ayn, Saira Sheikh, Iqbal Geoffrey and Seher Shah. It shifts attention away from the singular art object and focuses instead on artistic practice and discourse. Venue: Khoj Studios, Khirkee Extension, on February 10. Time: 11 am to 7 pm. Entry is free. 

Cultural milieu

Miniature art has been a long-standing tradition in Indian cultural milieu but is losing out in contemporary times where mostly the big and the bizarre capture eyeballs. In such a scenario, the group show of artworks – both paintings and sculptures - in miniature format by some of the best known names of Indian contemporary art are on display. Venue: Gallerie Ganesha, GK II, till February 28. Time: 11 am to 7 pm. Entry is free.

Colourful strokes

Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) presents an exhibition of paintings by Geetesh Sharma. Venue: Azad Bhavan Art Gallery, ICCR, I.P. Estate, from February 9 to 13. Time: 11 am to 6 pm.

On cloud 9

A show exhibiting paintings, sculptures and prints by legendary artists like F N Souza , M F Husain, Sidhartha, Paresh Maity, Dheeraj Chaudhary, Jai Zarohtia and other is on in the City. Called ‘On cloud 9’, the show has been curated by Sangeeta Raj in a unique style of bringing the masters and young artists together in harmony. Venue: Kalaa Sanskriti Academy Of Fine Arts, Aruna Asaf Ali Road, till February 10. Time: 11 am to 7 pm. Entry is free. 

Music

Paying tribute 

Classical vocalist Padmini Rao will pay a tribute to sitar maestro Pt Ravi Shankar by performing live along with a melodious jugalbandi by Murad Ali Khan on sarangi and Fateh Ali Khan on sitar. Venue: India Habitat Centre, Lodhi Road, on February 12. 
Time: 7 pm. Entry is free. 

Reliving Beatles

Come experience the magic that was the Beatles! Select CITYWALK presents ‘Down Memory Lane - Remembering the Beatles’.  Five  musicians come together to make a band that will take us all a trip down memory lane. With the narration of the story of the Beatle, from their origin, to the ultimate breakup in the 60s, this performance will be the perfect way of remembering the Beatles’. Venue:  First Floor, Select Citywalk, Saket, on February 9. Time: 6 pm. 

Traditional beats

Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) presents Mridangam recital by P. Jaya Bhaskar as part of Horizon Series. Venue:  Azad Bhavan Auditorium,  ICCR, I P Estate, on February 8. Time: 7 pm. Entry is free and seating on first come first served 
basis.

Potpourri

DJ night

DJ Cheenu is all set to rock Delhiites. The DJ will churn out some remix tunes to make you dance all night. Venue: Smoke House Grill, GK-II, on February 9. Time: 9 pm. For reservation call 41435531. 

Politricks

Sewara presents a comedy show ‘Politricks’ by Vir Das. It will be an hour-long show through the intricacies of democracy in India. The comedian take you to a hilarious night that dissects everything about the way this nation works, right from every politician you see on the news, to every scam you pretend to know about at dinner table conversations with affluent friends. Venue: The Garden Restaurant, Lodhi Road, on February 8. Time: 8 pm. Entry is by tickets. 

Festival of languages
Akshara Theatre presents ‘Festival of 4 Languages’, showcasing the best in theatre, poetry, music and film, presented in the four official languages of Delhi – Hindi, English, Urdu and Punjabi. During the four-day festival, plays, musical performances, poetry-recitation, films, talks will be presented by some of Delhi’s best-loved performers such as musician Rabbi Shergill, comedian Surinder Sharma, Kathak maestro Pt Birju Maharaj, actors Sushma Seth, Kanika Aurora, Amba Suhasini, Sudhir Tandon, Sabina Mehta Jaitley and others. Venue: Akshara Theatre, Baba Kharak Singh Marg, till February 10. Entry is by tickets of Rs 100 available at bookmyshow.com and Akshara Theatre.

Japanese sweets
Japan Foundation presents ‘Wagashi: The Art of Japanese Sweets’ – a lecture and demonstration by Noriyuki Myojin and Shogo Shimada. Venue: Nilgiri Room, Hotel Oberoi, Dr Zakir Hussain Marg, on February 10. Time: 2: 45 pm.