Violence in these parts erupted following the publishing of a translated article in a leading Kannada daily. The situation has remained peaceful without any fresh incidents since last night, he added.ADVERTISEMENTSpeaking to the media persons here on Thursday after his visit to Myroli, the forest area near Mutlupady in Hebri of Karkala taluk where naxal encounter took place, he said that normalcy has been restored in Shimoga and Hassan districts which witnessed large scale violence for two days. Until Wednesday afternoon, as many as 94 persons have been arrested in Shimoga while 61 persons have been apprehended in Hassan in connection with the violence. Further, arrest could be made based on the video clippings, he added.

Naxal issue
Lauding the joint operation by police and ANF at Myroli forest area, Singh declined to divulge any further details on naxal identification. He said that one naxal sympathiser has been arrested in connection with Monday’s incident. “We procured substantial information on the three member naxalite group that attacked police on Monday. Police are working out the strategy to find out the whereabouts of this group.” The 16 member team involved in the operation has been given due recognition. The naxal activities have come down drastically with the efforts taken by the police and ANF in the four districts of State. The initiatives taken by the State government has enabled the decrease in number of naxal supporters and sympathisers. Except for the information received by the department on naxal meet, there are no major activities reported for the last six months, he said. 

Socio economic problem
Answering a query, Singh said that the naxalite problem is not merely a law and order issue but also a socio economic problem, which needs to be addressed immediately. He had convened a high power action committee meeting in this connection on February 16 at the ANF Head Quarters in Karkala, in which the Additional Chief Secretary (Home), Secretaries from Forest, Revenue and Wildlife besides Deputy Commissioners, ZP CEOs, IGP, SPs and Deputy Conservators of Forest (DCF) from four naxal affected districts took part. The meeting discussed on the need to give more attention on implementing various government schemes in the naxal affected areas. Officials should follow more responsive attitude towards the problems of people living in these areas. Enhanced coordination and cooperation between the officials from the departments concerned to redress the grievances of the people is the need of the hour, he said.

Replying to another query, he said that the Central government has not taken any decision to declare Karnataka as naxal-prone state. Karnataka police would contact its counterpart in Kolkata to find out whether the naxalites operating in state have any links with Maoist groups active in that state, he added. 

Attacks on press
In reply to another query on recent attacks on the newspaper offices in Mangalore and Udupi, Singh said that the police have some clues on the attackers. However no arrest has been made so for, he added. 

Commissionerate
Singh said the new Police Commissionerate office in Mangalore has been declared by the government but arrangements had to be made for a full fledged office substantiating the purpose. The department has sought additional funds in the State budget to be presented tomorrow. Hopes are bright that Chief Minister will allocate sufficient funds for setting up a full fledged Commissionerate office, he added.
IGP (Western Range) Gopal Hosur, Udupi District SP Prawin Pawar and others were present.
DH News Service