As many as 700 people have volunteered for the most-awaited tiger census to be conducted across all tiger reserves and protected forest areas in south India. 

ADVERTISEMENTKarnataka has an average population of 300 tigers, the highest in India, as per the 2009 tiger census, spread across 5,000 sq km of forest area. 

Interestingly, 90 per cent of the volunteers are from Bangalore. According to Vijay Mohan Raj, Chief Conservator of Forests, the volunteers are from all walks of life. They include teachers, industrialists, housewives, retired citizens, students, commercial pilots and honorary wildlife wardens. They have taken a week-long off to take part in the census. 

Further, the 150 volunteers trained in September, 2013 in Bandipur Tiger Reserve, will work in the Chamarajanagar landscape only (Bandipur, Biligiri Rangaswamy Temple (BRT) wildlife sanctuary and Nagarhole tiger reserves). Fifty per cent of the 700 volunteers had worked in the 2009 census. There has been an overwhelming response this time from people, despite the ban on bringing and using cameras.

 During the 2009-10 census, 400 people had volunteered. This year the number has increased. While earlier 800 people had registered, 100 backed out at the last minute due to some reasons, Raj added. He added that many requests were pending for the weekends, especially for Nagarhole and Bandipur tiger reserves. Over 1,000 applications are pending. 

Speaking to Deccan Herald, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) Vinay Luthra said, “Volunteers have to pay Rs 100 for a day (which includes accommodation and food). People are still calling up to participate, but all bookings have been closed.” 

He pointed that week-long census could have some effect on tourism. Though only 10 per cent of the forest area is open for tourism, there are chances that safaris could be cancelled because of line transect assessments. Besides, no bookings were available in forest guesthouses. Bookings in JLR properties could also be tight. People will thus have to rely on private guesthouses on the fringes of forests.