Assam continued to be ravaged by flood as an estimated 19 lakh people were affected in the state due to heavy rainfall and swelling of rivers triggered by incessant rain in upper catchment areas of Arunachal Pradesh and Bhutan.

ADVERTISEMENTThe worst-affected districts are Lakhimpur, Golaghat, Bongaigaon, Jorhat, Dhemaji, Barpeta, Goalpara, Dhubri, Darrang, Morigaon and Sonitpur, the Assam State Disaster Management Authority (ASDMA) said.

The other affected districts are Sivsagar, Kokrajhar, Dibrugarh, Goalpara, Tinsukia, Biswanath, Nalbari, Baksa, Udalgluri, Kamrup (M), Chirang, Kamrup and South Kamrup, the ASDMA said.

The Brahmaputra is flowing above the danger mark in Guwahati, Nematighat in Jorhat, Tezpur in Sonitpur, Goalpara and Dhubri towns.

To provide succour to the affected people, relief has been distributed in all the flood-affected districts and funds for providing relief have been placed with the district administrations in advance.

The NDRF, SDRF and the Army are helping the district administration in evacuating the affected population to safe places. 

A total of 19 lakh people were directly of indirectly affected by floods.

State Disaster Response Force (SDRF) teams with deep divers have also been attached to the 27 Fire Stations of the state.

Meanwhile, eight rhino cubs displaced and separated from their mothers were rescued by Kaziranga National Park and Centre of Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC) teams.

The calves were separated during the floods from the mighty Brahmaputra that submerged over 90% of the World Heritage Site, the Kaziranga National Park (KNP) authority said.

Three of the calves are one-month-old, two are five- month-old, another two are seven-month old, while one is one-year- old, said CRWC veterinarian Dr Pranjit Basumatary.

On the other hand, the KNP authority rescued two hog deer which were found trapped in a fence when both were trying to flee towards a campus in search of food in a nearby village.

After villagers reported the matter, a team from KNP rescued them and admitted them to the CWRC semi-ICU ward, said Rathin Barman, the director of CWRC.

The ASDMA has opened a round-the-clock Control Room with phone numbers 1070, 1079 (Toll-free) and 0361-2237011 (Landline) for any information and assistance.
Relief camps

Authorities have opened 703 relief camps and distribution centres, where almost 2.3 lakh people are sheltered across the districts, the ASDMA said. 

2.13 lakh hectares of agricultural area has been inundated, besides washing away several roads, embankments, bridges and other infrastructure facilities.