Looks like Ham or amateur radio is easily one among the most sought-after hobbies for people of all age groups. Ham radio enthusiasts communicate with each other using their respective codes and these codes have a global reach. 

ADVERTISEMENTS Sathyapal (VU2FI), director, Indian Institute of Hams, has been instrumental in popularising the concept of Ham radio and its many features. He says that he has not only made new contacts through Ham radio but is also in touch with all of them. “I got my Ham licence in 1993 and as there wasn’t much awareness about Ham in those days, I was keen on getting youngsters involved in it. We have also been active in providing Ham communication during natural disasters and calamities. I have even been coordinating to provide Ham communication during National Championship Motor Rallies across the country,” explains Sathyapal. 

This form of communication has attracted people from all walks of life. Motorsports enthusiast Sujith Thomas (VU3GEI) says he was inspired to use Ham radio after he saw the police using their wireless set. “Ham radio makes the world a smaller place and brings you closer to different people across the globe. I’ve found it to be one of the most effective modes of communication,” says Sujith. Mahesh Acharya (VU3MBV) and Mansoor Ahmed (VU3GOU), both into the aircraft industry, couldn’t agree more with Sujith when they say, “Ham radio is not about helping yourself but about helping other people.

 In times of a natural disaster, this is the only communication line that remains uninterrupted.” Ham radio is also used during expeditions and Puneeth Jadhav (VU3AUP), who has helmed the communication wing during one of the expeditions from Kanyakumari to Kashmir, says, “You may not be able to reach people on their cellphones but you can certainly connect with them on the radio. You can be sure to trace a big group through this form of communication.”  

Traffic wardens in the city also say the radio indirectly helps clear traffic jams in several areas. Srinivas Shenoy (VU3NIX), a businessman and a traffic warden, says, “The radio comes handy during special duties and emergencies.” 

This form of communication encourages a cultural exchange of sorts because one gets to meet Ham radio enthusiasts from across the world. “You make new friends and start interesting conversations with total strangers over the radio. These people also end up being friends and there’s a lot of exchange of information as well,” adds Srinivas. 

The equipment of Ham radio is expensive so Poojith Prakash (VU3YPP), a student, came up with the idea of assembling his own Ham radio which has the same effect and quality but is less expensive. “It was when I was on a wildlife trek that I first saw someone using a Ham radio and got curious about it. I found the signals to be crystal clear even deep into the jungle,” says Poojith. 

Ham radio was extensively used during the recent floods in Chennai and Likith Sarvesh (VU3ZLS), who was a part of the rescue operation, feels that it allows for clear and crisp communication at all times. “The Ham radio was extensively used for the recent floods in Chennai. We could save so many lives and reach places where the normal mode of communication couldn’t reach because of this. It’s hard to explain the joy we feel when we save people who are stuck in such situations,” says Likith. Echoing Likith’s views, Vishvas (VU3HVD), another active Ham radio enthusiast who has been a part of several major rescue operations such as tsunami and floods in Uttarakhand, says, “We were able to supply water, food and medicines to people in the far-flung areas only because of Ham radio.” 

A few other members such as Sumukh (VU3MWA) and Vishwanath (VU3JHU) feel that the foremost quality required to get into Ham radio is self-discipline, dedication and commitment.
 
“Ham radio is serious business and nobody is allowed to misuse the communication for any other purpose. There’s quality control at every level,” they opine. 

(The members can be reached at 9448302677)