The white waters of the Mandovi river in Goa’s North Eastern terrain have emerged as an alternate ground for tourism, attracting those looking for adventure.

ADVERTISEMENTThe three-season-old white water rafting adventure introduced by the state-run Goa Tourism Development Corporation in association with British adventure sports expert John Pollard has been receiving increasing tourist footfalls in the state’s Mhadei Wildlife Sanctuary.

New Yorkshire-born Pollard, who was the first to introduce white water rafting in South of Himalayas, feels that people are now getting more interested in adventure tourism and this market is mostly riding on its popularity among domestic markets.

“People are getting more interested in adventure tourism. Indian market is something that you can develop compared to the foreign. You don’t have to be dependent on border notification,” he said.

The facility in Mhadei Wildlife Sanctuary, 8 km away from Valpoi town, was started in 2011 by Pollard after his successful stint in the wilds of Dandeli (Karnataka) and Kollad (Maharashtra).

The adventurist who started his company, Southern River Adventure and Sports Private Limited, along with his Goa-born wife Sylvia Kerkar, feels that it was a bit tough initially to try out this facility on the Mhadei river.

“The road access to the start point was a bit difficult, so also was to get the nod for the project by the state government. There were apprehensions that some foreigner with a multinational company is coming here to make money but that was not the case,” says Pollard. On a long Independence Day weekend, Pollard says they were busy days as several tourists turned up to enjoy rafting.

“But it is not the same every day,” he said, adding “two-and- half- month season is what we are hoping but it may be less if it rains less. It is a very difficult business to make commercially viable.” The rafting takes place when rains are at its best in the Western ghats, and for rest of the months, the rafts are on the banks.