Aruna Chandaraju takes a boat ride through the Coringa mangroves and wildlife sanctuary, a little-known region in Andhra Pradesh that seems to be increasingly attracting visitors.

ADVERTISEMENTBarely 15 km from Kakinada in coastal Andhra Pradesh, and located on the Kakinada-Yanam Road, this fascinating region of mangroves and wildlife sanctuary, called Coringa, is little known to the average tourist in the outside world. Many residents of Kakinada and nearby Visakhapatnam are largely unaware that they are living next to India’s second largest mangrove, which is also a fascinating sanctuary.

It is only in the past few years that the locals, as well as the state government, have woken up to the tourism potential of the Konaseema region, with its scenic beauty, delectable cuisine, and its wealth of famous temples and great shopping opportunities. We saw a rash of construction –– resorts, guesthouses, restaurants, boats –– as we drove through the region and wondered whether Coringa was better off being unknown, when its natural beauty was untouched!

As we made our way to Coringa Wildlife Sanctuary, we understood why the entire Konaseema area –– roughly the coastal region –– is famed for its picturesqueness. With rows of swaying coconut palms, lush green paddy fields, and the placid Godavari and its tributaries flowing alongside, dotted with quaint coracles, the Konaseema area is rightly celebrated for its scenic beauty.

We were accompanied to Coringa Sanctuary by C Venkata Sivaji, who owns a rest house here in Metlapalem. Sivaji and his tour-operator-friend V Rathna Kumar are some of the people who determinedly promote eco-friendly tourism, and are aware that indiscriminate promotion could ruin the natural wealth of this area. 

“Coringa Sanctuary and mangroves are spread over 235 sq km and it was declared a sanctuary in 1978, to protect the natural mangrove vegetation,” says the faded board at the entrance. Even if you do not see too many wild animals, a walk through this serene forest area over walkways of wooden planks, listening to the birdsong, can be fascinating.

The sanctuary is a part of the mangroves and is formed in the delta and estuary region of River Godavari, which flows into the Bay of Bengal here. It is located in the backwaters of the sea. About 35 plant species from 24 families are found here, say official records. The sanctuary has an 18-km-long sand pit in the north-eastern side, where the endangered Olive Ridley turtles come to rest seasonally. 

Cruising down the river through these mangroves, in the right weather, can be an enchanting experience. Afternoons can be murderously hot in this region. Apart from these cruises, mangroves have a greater and more enduring value –– they provide timber for boat-building, protect the coast from erosion, stabilise the sediments and thus build up rich coastal soil and act as barriers against high velocity winds, tidal waves and coastal storms. They provide shelter to wildlife and migratory birds as well.

The ecological conditions of mangroves are unique. These special conditions hence allow certain fauna and flora to thrive, which would not survive elsewhere. Crabs and molluscs and mudskippers thrive in the bottom of the trees. Animals include otters, estuarine crocodiles, jackal monkeys, fishing cats, etc.

Watch the birdie

A boat ride through the mangroves will be a delight for bird-watchers. We could not identify most, but according to official records, these mangroves shelter flamingoes, seagulls, little egrets, blue kingfisher, pied kingfisher, pond heron, grey heron, Brahmini kites, little cormorant, red wattle lapwing, reef heron, crow pheasant, black-capped kingfisher, sandpiper, etc. 

Cruise options in these backwaters are now getting hotter than the searing midday sun of this region. Rathna Kumar told us of the popular Papikondalu cruise and some others, which include Kolluru, Rajahmundry towns and even go up to Bhadrachalam –– all with cottages on the river banks for optional overnight stays like those at Dindi, Rajolu, etc.
Back on land, we enjoyed a delectable meal rustled up by Sivaji, who ensures visitors get a taste of the local cuisine.

Being vegetarians, we went only for curries like thelakapindi beerakaya (ridgegourd with sesame-seed residue), kobbarikai senagapoppu (coconut gratings with steamed chana dal), aavapettina vankaya (mustard-flavoured eggplant) and a dessert of minapasunnundalu (urad dal laddoos) and ariselu (sweet pancake). He was rather disappointed at us shunning the local delicacies which his non-vegetarian guests generally gorge on –– gongura prawns, chintachiguru royyalu (prawns with tender tamarind leaves), uppuchepa vankaya (dry fish with eggplant), chepala pulusu (fish gravy), etc.

Next on our agenda was Uppada, neighbouring Kakinada. A well-known beach town, it has a famous handloom weaving centre whose exquisite products are now getting attention from fashion designers and leading retailers. Temple hoppers can check out the famed shrines around here –– Annavaram’s Sathyanarayana Temple which is one of India’s biggest and busiest, the Suryanarayana or Sun God Temple and Vinayaka Temple at Ayinavilli, Lakshmi Narasimha temple at Antharvedi, etc.