Shreyas Aakarshan might hold a day job that involves closed captioning for international television content, but he pursues several passions on the side.

ADVERTISEMENTIn addition to playing the bass for the city-based progressive rock band ‘Traces’, he has also dabbled in the fields of photography theatre and television. He talks about how it all began and what keeps him going in a chat with Chetana Divya Vasudev.

When did you realise you were wanted to learn music?

Growing up, I listened to a lot of Western music, Michael Jackson, Pink Floyd, Led Zeppelin and Jimi Hendrix, among other others. When I was in class 10 — that was in 2004 — I watched my first live concert at Unmaad at IIM-B. Soon, I was hooked to rock ‘n’ roll and thought I should learn something. I started training to play the guitar for the next one-and-a-half years. I left off before my PUC II exams and then college started.

Did you resume after that?

No, I when I was pursuing my BA, I decided to pick up the bass guitar and essentially taught myself how to play. As a student in Surana College, I was part of a classical fusion band called ‘Maya’ and also a funk rock band called ‘Illuminati’. Later on, I played with the ‘Beat Gurus’ for a while, and after a break of four years, I joined ‘Traces’ last year.

How did photography happen?

Back in college, we had a crash course of sorts in photography and I began experimenting with the camera. In 2012, two years after I left college, I bought a DSLR. Initially, I shot random things. Eventually, however, I zeroed in on concert photography and worked with MTV Indies for a while.

So that helped you combine two of your passions?

Yes. I wouldn’t really call it my dream job because it was something that simply fell into place. But being a concert photographer let me take in music in different ways — when I was playing or performing and when I was working. I still do freelance and if something interesting came up, I would jump at it.

Are there any other genres of photography you’d like to do?

If I had some money, I’d like to do wildlife photography. When I travel, I have shot animals and birds, but nothing spectacular. Taking it up seriously might prove too expensive for me, at least at the moment.

What genres of music do you like listening to?

Everything: Indian classical to metal and rock. I also try to watch as many live concerts as I can and understand all the nuances of performing arts.

Your influences?

‘Megadeth’, ‘Tool’, ‘Meshuggah’... There are many more, but these are constantly on my playlist.

Any other interests and hobbies you have?

I used to do theatre, which I really miss. The troupe I was part of — ‘Pratikriyaa’ — . I have also done some downhill rigid fork mountain biking at the Turahalli forest, which is close to where I live. Even otherwise, I enjoy cycling. I used to be part of South Fire Cycling, a group that goes on night-time rides.

A quick look

Shreyas Aakarshan is the bassist with ‘Traces’, a progressive rock band in Bengaluru. The 27-year- old was born and brought up in the city. He is a graduate in journalism, psychology and English from Surana College. He has also played with the bands ‘Illuminati’ and ‘Beat Gurus’, has had a short stint in theatre, is passionate about photography and loves cycling.