Within the realm of the South Pacific Ocean lies Fiji, the archipelago of 300-plus islands. Sure, diving with the sharks, snorkeling, zip-lining over the forests and staying at luxury resorts could be some of the things that one can enjoy here, or in any other island haven. But what sets Fiji apart is its people who are full of life and ready to be of assistance at any given time.

ADVERTISEMENTWhen in Fiji, there are no deadlines, for you are at the liberty of what Fijians believe in — ‘No hurry, No worry’. Ask someone when a bus or a pickup will arrive and you’ll get a laid-back nod and a smile that accompany the words, “Fiji time,” which could mean a couple of minutes or an hour. 

Fijians are the friendliest of people. In hotels or on tours, or in the remotest villages, their greetings come with the widest of smiles and a hearty ‘bula’. Why, a bula could surprise you from across the road, the other bank of the river; or from a young homemaker carrying things back home... Bula means hello, but it’s used variously — to mean welcome and just about anything high-spirited. If you’re lost, a bula could get you help. The most impressive bula that did fall on my ears during my trip to Fiji, put together by Fiji Tourism, has to be at the Outrigger Fiji Beach Resort, Sigatoka, when ushers’ greetings could be heard from one end of the resort to another.

Indian connect

It’s safe to say that there is definitely a Fiji-Indian connect. There are processions of Ganesha idols as part of many festivities. I even interact with many who speak about it — the person who drives me to the zip-lining activity, who now doesn’t remember where exactly in South India he hails from; or others who are skilful in Fiji-Hindustani.

Many say that in 1879, nearly 90 ships made their way to Fiji from India, with labourers onboard. They were transported here to work in sugarcane plantations, and many of them stayed on. Some like Vishal Venkatesha, general manager at a resort, knows that he has family in northern India, and hopes to visit them soon. There are others like Mohan Chinnaswamy who did visit Fiji for a holiday, but decided to move to the island nation to start a multi-million dollar resort project. He vouches that it’s the warmth of the place and its people that make him stay.

The island has a much to offer as delicious fare. It can be challenging for vegetarians to find carbohydrate-rich food; the cuisine here for the meat and seafood lovers offers plenty. From the grilled mahi-mahi to the seafood kokoda, the cassava cake to taro (edible leaves) chips, everything seems a grand spread. I also attend the Flavours of Fiji cooking class at Denarau Island, where unique dishes are created with the assistance of local cooks, as they take you on a mouth-watering journey of traditional Fijian and Indo-Fijian flavours. 

The engaging hosts, including Fiji-Indian Aarthi Pillai, offer interesting facts, entertaining stories, and highlight the medicinal and nutritional values of the ingredients used. I make bhindi curry, murghi-and-aalu curry and roti, with coconut barfi, but then I complement the fare with Fijian delights like rourou (made of taro), ika vakalolo (fish in coconut milk) and tavioka vakasoso (cassava in coconut cream).

The only wildlife park

Out in nature, apart from river safaris and adventure sports, there is much to be seen. For me, this means a trip to the Kula Bird Eco Park at Sigatoka. Ask for Miti. The guide’s candid conversations, witty remarks and fluid style of interweaving comedy with facts would leave one wanting to tour the park again. The eco park, spread over 28 acres and set across three valleys, has 12 acres open to its visitors. The huge walk-through will showcase the habitats of resident parrots, doves, water birds and reptiles. Duck down if the parrots swoop in. Know that they are harmless. Ocean turtles, soft coral and tropical fish here would make one wonder about the marine world that surrounds the many islands of Fiji.

Everything in Fiji is bright and colourful — the sarongs that the women wear casually, or even the formal wear that the staff sports at hotels. Everything’s loud yet inviting. Some women are seen sporting a red hibiscus behind either one of the ear; behind the left ear if the person is single; behind the right if the person is committed. In fact, even the Fijian Dollar notes are in shades of blue, green and pink.

Fijians are simple. They are fun-loving too. From the morning cheer to a hearty meal they will invite one to their household and narrate stories of their past! And they sure love to pass on this cheer.