A probe into the death of five big cats in the Bannerghatta National Park in Bangalore over the past fortnight has drawn attention to the shocking treatment being meted out to animals there. The animals were reportedly fed stale meat in unhygienic conditions. 

They contracted e-coli infection which led to gastroenteritis. Twenty-one lions and tigers fell ill. Two lions and three tigers lost their lives. Park veterinarians say that while one tigress is still battling for her life, others are responding to medication. The worst seems to be over. The investigation report indicates that the deaths of the tigers were wholly avoidable. Stale meat was given to the animals in rusted iron buckets. Besides, conditions in the enclosures were found to be filthy. Uneaten meat and bones are not removed and water waste lies in stagnant pools. Not surprisingly, flies and other insects abound. The serial deaths at the park were waiting to happen.

India’s decision to set up wildlife sanctuaries and national parks was widely applauded as these provided for protection of wild animals and their habitats. The chances of survival of animals belonging to endangered species were thought to be enhanced through the setting up of such parks. But the Bannerghatta National Park has proved that these parks could well turn out to be death traps for the animals. Since the animals are in enclosures they cannot hunt and kill for themselves. They are forced to eat what is given to them. At Bannerghatta, the tigers had no option but to eat the stale meat.

Park officials have blamed the stale meat on the long time it takes to transport meat from the city. The probe team has now recommended setting up of a slaughter house near the park so that animals can be provided with fresh meat. However, what excuse do park authorities have for the dirty cages and the unhygienic safari area? Millions of rupees are being poured into tiger conservation. The problem therefore is not one of shortage of funds but of its efficient use. Is money being spent on the tigers or is it making its way to private pockets? Ensuring better hygiene does not need much money. It requires the will to make it happen. And that was clearly lacking at Bannerghatta. The death of five big cats is a catastrophic loss for India’s efforts to protect the tiger. It must stir authorities out of their slumber.ADVERTISEMENT