Harsh wilderness

ADVERTISEMENTYellowstone is a nature series on Animal Planet which takes a look at a year in the life of Yellowstone National Park, examining its wildlife adapt to living in one of the harshest wilderness on earth. Stabilised camera enables the team to capture natural animal behaviour from the air, as well as dramatic, wide angle landscape shots. Watch this spectacular episode of ‘Winter’ on July 20 at 10 pm as at temperatures plunging to 40 degrees celsius and with several metres of snowfall, Yellowstone freezes solid for six months every year. In the extreme cold, moisture in the air freezes too. Explore and find out that how this severe climate is the greatest challenge facing the Park’s few animals, but for the wolf, it is the season of opportunity. 


Creating life

World renowned scientist Dr J Craig Venter announced that he and his team at the J Craig Venter Institute (JCVI) became the first in history to synthetically create a living self-replicating cell. The news holds groundbreaking potential to a solution of a host of global challenges including, generating new food sources and vaccines; cleaning up pollution; destroying cancer cells; creating new energy sources; producing clean water; repairing defective genes; and more. Discovery Channel will exclusively take viewers inside Dr Venter’s nearly decade-long, pioneering quest to produce life synthetically in Creating Synthetic Life. Watch the episode on July 20 at 8 pm.  


Show on football

The football season is over but with Nick, the fever continues. The channel presents a story of dreams, friendship and football. Catch Dreamkix on Nick — a new show based on a farmyard football team that does its best to be the best. This award winning story premiered on the channel recently and airs Monday to Friday at 6 pm and 8 pm. Dreamkix revolves around a farmyard football team that does its best to join the greatest sporting event of all, —Dream League — where the most powerful teams on the planet compete. The protagonist Roy, builds a team that is originally made up of athletically challenged characters. However, once these teammates come together, they overcome their limitations, discover their own unique strengths and become heroes on the soccer field and winners in their daily lives. With the help of friendship, determination and team spirit, watch the underdogs take over the league!