Rolling hills of green till the eye can see, punctuated by clusters of trees and cute little houses at regular intervals. A fine contrast with the streaky blue sky that seems to compete with the picturesque setting around. The nip in the air is unmistakable, reminding me that I’m far, far away from the heat and dust of city life. Of course, yes. Am at Chail, that scenic paradise in Himachal Pradesh that’s at once beguiling and inviting.

Situated close to Shimla, at around 45 km, Chail offers its visitors an idyllic experience that’s almost unparalelled. Chail being my next stop after Shimla, I am completely enamoured by the place. The first thing that strikes me on landing in Chail is the peace and quiet. Ideal for people like me who like to engage in silent commune with nature. I move around the place like a child in a candy shop, enjoying every bit of this slice of paradise.

The place has an interesting history, too. A nondescript mountain village till the 1893, it underwent a transformation following the banishment of Bhupinder Singh, the Maharaja of Patiala, from Shimla. Wondering why? Well, Bhupinder Singh fell in love with the daughter of the then Commander-in-Chief of the British Indian Army, Lord Kitchner, and the two of them eloped. Enraged by this, Lord Kitchner forbade him from entering Shimla.

 Bhupinder Singh, on the other hand, was missing Shimla, his summer capital. He wanted a summer capital in a place very similar to Shimla. Scouting for a suitable place to build his summer home, he zeroed in on Chail. That’s how Chail was founded. Though very similar to Shimla in its scenic beauty, the experience it offers is very different in terms of tranquillity, and personal space. No crowd, no noise. Setting my own pace, I avoid all the touristy haunts and savour the beauty of Chail in all its majestic splendour.

Walking within
I walk, walk and walk, exploring the place on foot. I look around and all I can see are the snow-capped Shivalik peaks on all sides. That’s when I remember reading that Chail is situated 2,250 metres above sea level, and is spread across three hillocks — Rajgarh, Pandewa and Sadh Tiba, overlooking the valley of Sutlej. The dense cover of pine and deodar trees further adds to its allure.

I lose myself in the sylvan surroundings, till my tummy starts growling. I check the time. It’s almost 3 pm. Well past lunch time. And, I haven’t even realised. Such is the charm of Chail.

Making my way back to the town, I grab some fruits to settle the growling of my stomach, and begin exploring the town. My first stop is at the majestic Chail Palace. Built to avenge his banishment from Shimla, Maharaja Bhupinder Singh has ensured that Chail Palace is exceptional in its architecture and setting. Set in a sprawling 75-acre estate, this palace is now converted into a heritage hotel so that commoners like me can enjoy the regal splendour of the place with its ornate furniture, green lawns and orchards.

Even as I am admiring the beauty of the palace, I remember that my next stop is at the Chail cricket ground, famed to be the highest cricket ground in the world. I am all eager. I reach the ground and can’t help but smile. I silently thank Maharaja Bhupinder Singh for being a cricket enthusiast. I learn that the ground is now being used by Chail Military School as a playground.

I move on. There are many more touristy places to visit. I am in no mood for them. I go back to my hotel room balcony that offers panoramic views of the Shivalik peaks, settle down  with a cup of piping hot coffee, and soak myself in the idyllic beauty of the place.

Early next morning, I set out, to do the tourist circuit — Sidh Baba Ka Mandir, Chail Wildlife Sanctuary, Kali Temple, and so on. I make brief stops at every place, all the while pining to choose my corner and simply not do anything. Finally, post-lunch, I find myself sitting on a small hillock, taking in the richness of nature. Sitting still, I let time go by, without a care in the world. Till such time when the birds start returning home. It is time for me to leave too. I find myself humming my favourite tune on my way back to the hotel. I am  truly happy, I realise. Well, Chail has definitely worked its magic on me. 

Fact File
How to get there
*By road: Chail is well-connected to cities like Delhi, Chandigarh, Kalka, Shimla and Kandaghat.
*By air: The nearest airports are at Shimla and Chandigarh.
*By rail: Kalka is the nearest railway station.
Places of interest
*Chail Palace, Sidh Baba Ka Mandir, Chail Gurudwara Sahib, Chail Wildlife Sanctuary, Kali Tibba, the playground.

ADVERTISEMENT