The Centre has reorganised the National Board of Wildlife in violation of established law by removing most of the non-governmental members who could raise voice against ecologically dangerous development proposals.

ADVERTISEMENTThe controversial move – notified on July 22 – created a stir among conservationists and wildlife experts, who plan to write to the Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Environment Minister Prakash Javadekar, flagging the violations.

“The notification lacks clarity, it’s non-transparent and raises doubts about the possible constitution of the National Board of Wildlife. 

“If the constitution of the board and standing committee violates the Wild Life Protection (Amendment) Act, 2002, then the body and the decisions it takes will be open to legal challenges,” one of the conservationists told Deccan Herald.

While the 47-member board generally meets once a year, it is the standing committee headed by the environment minister that meets regularly to clear proposals.
All projects falling within protected areas (forests) and within a 10 km radius of the protected area have to approach the NBWL for wildlife clearance.

There are three violations of the law. While the act says the board will have five persons to represent NGOs, the notification does not nominate any NGO. Instead, Gujarat Ecological Education and Research (GEER) Foundation was chosen in that category.

GEER, according to the information on its website, is a Gujarat government organisation. It was set up in 1982 by the Gujarat forests and environment department. 

The chairperson of the board is Chief Minister of Gujarat while majority board members are from Gujarat government.

The second violation leads to removal of well-known wild life experts like M K Ranjitsinh, Ashad Rehmani, M D Madhusudan, Prerna Bindra and A J T Johnsingh from the board.

While the act stipulates 10 eminent conservationists, ecologists and environmentalists will have to be in the board, the environment ministry nominated only two – Raman Sukumar, a professor at Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore and H S Singh, a retired forest officer of Gujarat cadre.

Lastly, the new notification reduces the number of states in the board which makes it mandatory for 10 states and Union territories to be represented in the NBWL. But this time, the government nominated only five – Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand and Andaman and Nicobar Islands.

Indian wildlife and its habitat including protected areas, forests, rivers, wetlands, grasslands and dry lands, are under tremendous pressure because of continuous habitat loss. 

There are close to 200 projects pending before the board including several large scale hydroelectric plants, mines, industrial units and strategic projects close to China border.