The great Chinese philosopher Lao Tzu quoted: “A good traveller has no fixed plans, and is not intent on arriving.” This simple, yet profound saying is apt when referring to the pristine vibe and aura that India, as a tourist destination, attracts.

ADVERTISEMENTFor aeons, India has been attracting explorers and the curious, alike, to taste its mystery and serenity. And, for each visit, the country has been unlocking new treasures and experiences.

While India has captivated visitors from abroad, lately it is her own people who have evinced interest to converge and merge with the myriad cultures and hues that make up this vast land, which occupies 3,287,263 sq km. 

“India has been home to multiple religions, and is blessed with a diverse range of tourism offerings, be it the rich cultural heritage, historically significant monuments and milestones, stunning locations for flora and fauna, or culinary delights,” says Thomas Cook (India) President and Chief Operating Officer (Outbound, MICE, Domestic and Sports Tourism) Rajeev D Kale.

Once looked upon as a destination for volunteerism and backpackers, in 2015, India witnessed a noticeable shift in the mindset of travellers from around the globe, who have now discovered their Indian decadence. While this country continues to be a strong destination for budget-friendly travel, over the years (especially in 2015), India blossomed into a destination offering an array of luxurious experiences to explore as well.

Referring to India’s position as a global destination, TripAdvisor India Country Manager Nikhil Ganju says, “As a global destination, India has made significant strides... Indian travellers are maturing as global travellers, seeking better experiences.”

With India growing as a global must-visit destination, its mystique has caught the fascination of Indian travellers themselves, and domestic tourism has hit a new high. 

What Indians want

A few years ago, visiting a nearby foreign country was seen as a novel trend, while India didn’t much figure on most of the paying Indians’ touring list, often seen as a budget destination. But in recent times, this trend has changed. While the places to see have largely remained unchanged, they offer a lot more today, and the way tourism in India is packaged, has evolved.

While visiting a website of any major tour operator in India, the large collection of Indian holidays that dot the web pages is impressive. While popular products such as Agra, Delhi, and Jaipur (Golden Triangle), Kerala, Goa, and temples of Tamil Nadu, are always sought after, tour operators are also capitalising on the new age Indian, who wants to know his/her country better — by offering products such as luxury Indian holidays, luxury train journeys, Buddhist circuit, and wildlife circuit, among others.

“With the upcoming long weekends in 2016, domestic destinations have become increasingly popular, with favourite options such as the Konkan belt — Devgad, Velas, Vengurl, Harishchandragad Fort, Panhala, Kolad in Maharashtra, and in Uttarakhand: Dehradun, and Rishikesh,” Kale says.

The amount of travel products available for the domestic Indian traveller is mind-boggling. Recent trends noticed, basis bookings with Thomas Cook India, show that there has been a spike in demand for regular favourites like Leh and Ladakh, Jim Corbett and Ranthambore (wildlife safaris), to name a few, along with many unexplored locations. This is testament to the evolving preferences of Indian travellers, especially the young brigade.

There’s so much to see, in so less time! That’s the situation in India. The country just has so many treats and specialities to offer its tourists, and Indians themselves are no different to this trend.

According to the TripBarometer study by TripAdvisor, “Overall, 82% of the Indian travellers plan to try something new in 2016, with the top choices being — Wildlife safari (35%), Cruise (33%) and Adventure travel (29%).”

According to Ganju, “The larger segments surround destinations of historical, natural, and cultural importance. Spiritual, rejuvenation and wellness tourism (spa and yoga), volunteering tourism (For eg. visiting village schools to teach students in one’s spare time), and pilgrimages, are the prime focus of domestic tourism in India. In terms of pilgrimages, it has even caught on with youngsters.”

Sightseeing is one of the biggest pastimes in the country, where tourism is concerned. And bringing out the best for the domestic tourist are the country’s natural wonders, in the form of adventure tourism. 

Says Ganju, “Adventure tourism as a big trend has taken off. Unlike their global counterparts, Indians often indulge in soft adventure, such as wildlife safaris, high altitude trekking, forest hiking, camping, and rafting. Around 30-40% of Indian travellers have said that they had the intent of going on a trip where there is at least one adventure.”

According to TripAdvisor’s Adventure Travel Survey, Goa, Rishikesh, Himachal Pradesh, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, and Leh and Ladakh, are among popular destinations for adventure.

“Arguably the most significant, systemic trend in worldwide tourism today is the demand for experiential travel — typically meant to convey the idea of more immersive, local, authentic, adventurous and active travel. The evolving young Indian traveller is showing strong demand for adrenalin-infused adventure, to meet new people, learn new things, and experience a new life,” Thomas Cook’s Kale says.

Most urban professionals pay a lot of attention to make the most of the weekend by moving out of the cities’ humdrum, to quaint getaways nearby. Road tripping has especially become popular, since it blends the thrill of driving or riding, with elements of discovery and unpredictability, and is also light on the pocket.

According to Kale, “For today’s consumer, travel is increasingly getting more inclined towards exploring non-traditional offbeat experiences. India offers a vast list of unexplored locations across the coordinates of the country, which are unique in their own way, and offer immense potential to boost domestic tourism.”

Getting into the travel shoes

All this travel evolution is being fostered by several factors. With rapidly increasing purchasing power of the middle-class, through economy package offers, better road and rail connectivity, better accommodation options, and evolving lifestyles, domestic tourist traffic is in fact one of the main drivers of growth in Indian tourism, which is getting more and more experiential.

It must also be noted that the quality of tourism in India has also improved today. Steps taken by respective state governments, along with the Centre, have boosted the sector. Proactive measures in the realms of skill development, marketing and advertising, and trade shows and campaigns, have sent the message home.

Tourism has become one of the largest service industries in India with consistent growth. According to recent reports, it is expected that its contribution to the country’s GDP will grow at the rate of 7.8% yearly, in the period 2013-23, and domestic tourism alone will grow at 7-8%. 

With domestic travel bringing in improvements and visibility to a destination, inbound tourism has also been flourishing in recent years, due to improved connectivity to and from the country. 

According to the Indian Brand Equity Foundation, the number of Foreign Tourist Arrivals (FTAs) has grown steadily, reaching around 7.103 million people during January-November 2015, growing at 4.5%.

But a few key challenges remain, in the form of weak infrastructural facilities at few places in comparison with some others, lack of advertising and marketing of many worthy spots, safety and visa issues. 

But as has India, for the last 1,000 years or more, continue to fascinate visitors, among her own people and foreigners, welcoming them to come and sense more and more of her warm hospitality.