In a first of its kind, Karnataka Forest Department (KDF), in association with Mysuru Bird Watchers Group is conducting a scientific survey of the birds at Ranganathittu Bird Sanctuary, Srirangapatna taluk, Mandya district, on March 4.ADVERTISEMENTRanganathittu Bird Sanctuary comprises 25 islands and the Forest Department has made necessary arrangements. For every two islands, five experts will be deputed for counting the bird species. As many as 50 to 60 volunteers will participate in the survey to be conducted on March 4 between 6 am and 9 am. The bird watchers from parts of the state will participate in the census.According to Deputy Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) V Yedukondalu, the scientific survey is the first of its kind. A few bird watchers have recorded different bird species in the sanctuary, but, the numbers are not accurate. According to the available data, as many as 220 species exist in the region. Of these, the painted stork, Asian openbill stork, common spoonbill, woolly-necked stork, black-headed ibis, lesser whistling duck, Indian shag, Stork-billed kingfisher, egret, cormorant, oriental darter, spot-billed pelican and heron breed here are regular.The department, along with botanists, conducted vegetation survey a few days ago, he said. "We have collected basic, general data on vegetation structure and plant species on which the birds construct nest and breed. The department has also formed a Vegetation Association," he informed.Hereafter, the bird census will be a regular affair and Forest Department, along with the volunteers will conduct survey four times in a year. "As a variety of bird species visits Ranganathittu at different seasons, we have planned to conduct surveys in February, May, August and November," Yedukondalu said.During winter months, starting from mid-December, thousands of birds congregate in the bird sanctuary. Of which, some birds come from Siberia, Latin America and parts of north and east India.WorkshopPrior to the census, the Forest Department, in association with Mysuru Bird Watchers Group, has organised a workshop on bird census at Aranya Bhavan in Mysuru at 3.30 pm on March 3. The workshop is open to all the interested bird watchers.