Phone call for help

What happens when a young man gets a call from a woman who claims to be kidnapped, and in great danger? 

This is the story of ‘Cellular’, directed by David Ellis. The movie stars Kim Basinger, Chris Evans and Jason Statham. 

Abducted by strange men and suddenly finding her entire family in a danger, a helpless woman manages to find a telephone and gets connected to a young, happy-go-lucky guy.

 What follows is a day of mayhem as this boy — initially sceptical of the truth of her statements — beats all odds to rescue the woman and her family. ‘Cellular’ airs on HBO at 5 pm on August 6.

Back to where it all began

Night at the Museum: Battle of the Smithsonian’ airs on Star Movies at 6.50 pm on August 6. 

Directed by Shawn Levy, this comedy flick stars Ben Stiller, Hank Azaria, Amy Adams, Owen Wilson, Robin Williams, and Steve Coogan. Larry Daley, who was once a night guard at the museum, is now wealthy and rich. 

He owns a company and is happy in his life. Fate, however, has other plans for him. 
He once again finds himself in the place where he had left of. What happens next? Tune in to the movie to find out.

Brothers-in-arms

Swamp Brothers’ airs on the Discovery Channel at 10 pm on August 6. 

Meet Robbie and Stephen Keszey, brothers who run one of the most unique family businesses — working with wild and dangerous animals deep in the swamps of Florida. 
While Robbie is an exotic animal expert, Stephen is a former New York bartender who is just beginning to learn the perils of the family trade. 

Follow these remarkable brothers as they brave Florida’s most dangerous wildlife, including pythons, alligators and bears, in order to capture and return this animals to a safe environment.

Up against a don

The Fighter Man: Ghayal stars Sameera Reddy and Sonu Sood. The movie revolves around an automobile mechanic, Ashok, whose father throws him out the house when his violent actions kill his own grandmother. 

Ashok then falls in love with his neighbour, Aishwarya. However, a don named KK also falls in love with her and Ashok’s best friend Hussain is killed while trying to save Aishwarya from the clutches of KK. 

This angers Ashok, who in the meantime has gone to Madurai. He rushes back to protect his family and Aishwarya and ends up killing KK’s brother. 

The don is not ready to let this go — what follows is a twisted fight to see which young man will emerge on top and thus, secure the future of his family and loved ones. Tune in to The Fighter Man: Ghayal at 9 pm on Sony Max on August 6.ADVERTISEMENTDelicious treats on the table

The second series of ‘Kylie Kwong: Simply Magic’ airs on TLC at 7.30 pm on August 6. The show is a tribute to food and everything to do with it. 

In this episode, viewers are in for a treat. Chef Kylie Kwong has afternoon tea at Hong Kong’s luxurious Peninsula Hotel before showing everyone how to make a glamorous tea-time snack — king prawn toast. Tune in to the show to pick up some delightful recipes for the table.



(TV SHOW TIMINGS ARE SUBJECT TO CHANGE)