Animal expert and adrenaline junkie, Donald Schultz, travels the world in search of rare reptiles. Lakshmi Palecanda writes about his life-altering adventures

ADVERTISEMENTWildlife conservation is a strange beast. While we all know and acknowledge that wildlife has to be conserved or it becomes extinct, it is an undeniable fact that some species of wildlife get more attention and love than others. For example, the whole world may rise and fight for the cute and cuddly Panda or the Polar Bear, but a slimy, slithery, highly venomous Russell’s Viper will have us all running in the opposite direction.

There are very few who go to bat for venomous animals, like snakes, box jellyfish and monitor lizards. Donald Schultz, host of Wild Recon, a show on Animal Planet, is one of them. He started off his work as a herpetologist, and began to collect venom, blood and DNA samples from venomous animals to help develop anti-venom and to study the health and evolution of the animals. He also happens to be an adrenaline junkie, who skydives and races bikes for (get this) relaxation. Ironically, I, the ultimate laid back person, got to interview him.

Donald grew up in South Africa, with a lot of wild animals around. When he was  young, he and his father caught a snake, went to the Durbin Snake Park and got to meet a lot of people who knew a lot about snakes. “It just went from there,” he says. However, he adds that his family is a pretty normal family. “I’m the black sheep that runs around the world and messes with deadly animals and jumps out of helicopters,” he comments.

His inspiration

Donald was absolutely inspired by Steve Irwin, the Crocodile Hunter, who also did not have much formal university education, but did have a real knack for working with animals. “I was obviously devastated when he was killed,” he says, referring to Irwin’s accidental death during an encounter with a poisonous stingray. “It’s a risk we all take in doing what we love.”

What about the rest of us that don’t love serpents, and are afraid of them? How do we deal with our phobia? “People think reptiles want to bite them and that’s just not true at all,” says Donald. “Reptiles bite usually in self-defence and Southeast Asia is where a large number of reptile bites are reported. Bites happen, but that being said, you can walk past most snakes and they won’t bite you.” 

Venom is expensive for snakes to make, and they actually losing energy when they bite us. He advises people to turn and walk away when they see a snake. “The majority of bites happen when people try to mess with snakes, try to kill them or catch them, or move them out of the way, which is a good sentiment, but for the most part if you don’t know what you’re doing with snakes, just leave them alone and you’ll be fine.” — his words.

So how bad have things gotten? Donald recounts an incident, when he was in Australia, working with a brown tree snake, which wasn’t supposed to be toxic. He got bitten and started having problems with his left arm. But he tried to pass it off as nothing. “Three hours later when I couldn’t move my arm and I was having heart palpitations, I realised that maybe the snake is dangerous and does have quite toxic venom. But we didn’t know what the venom does, because all the studies until then said that they weren’t really that toxic. So you’re in a weird place where you don’t have anti-venom, you don’t know what the venom is going to do, and you can’t exactly rush to a hospital and tell them what bit you because you’re supposedly the expert and know everything about the snake.” And we think we have work-related problems!

Not your usual host

Unlike many TV show hosts who work for television, Donald and his friend Devon were already in the business of collecting venom, blood and DNA for pharmaceutical research, conservation and identification of new species, before they went to the Animal Planet with an idea for a show. They now work with a camera crew, who have shot a lot of Discovery and Animal Planet shows, and are really savvy when it comes to animals. The duo knows exactly how to work with each other, and Devon often warns him if he is getting out of hand or warns him if people are in danger. Having shot the entire series with only one harmless snake bite, Donald can lay claim to a really good track record, despite dealing with the deadliest animals on the planet.

The show Wild Recon is absolutely riveting, once you’ve made the leap to the idea that snakes and other venomous animals are dangerous only if we go for them, and that they deserve a life too. It is fascinating to watch Donald not only spot, run after and catch the animals in their own environment, but also handle them with gentleness, while talking knowledgeably about the deadly creatures. And if these were not enough draws for the show, get this: Donald is allergic to anti-venom. So he cannot really afford to get bitten.

Need I say more?