Bhadra Wildlife Protection Trust founder trustee D V Girish, Wildcat-C Organisation Convener Sridev Hulikere and State Wildlife Board Member S Girija Shankar stated in a press release that the project will pose threat to the environment. “Water shortage crises will crop up in lakes including Hebbehalla and Thadabehall. Somavahini lake, which is the main water source in Bhadra reserve forest will also face the problem of water shortage,” they warned. The dam will be coming up at the very sensitive spot of Western Ghat at Upper Hebbe. The garland canal of the dam will pose more threat to human life. The Bhadra reserve forest will face acute shortage of water as 29 kms of canal will be built, environmentalists pointed out. 

There are plans to utilise 7 TMC water from the Hebbe lake for the Hebbe diversion project. As a result, the Bhadra reservoir will lose 7 TMC water, they said. At present, many residents, who live in regions at the end of the canal, do not get sufficient water. New project will enhance their problem further. The Government should review the decision before implementing the project, they suggested. 

The work on the proposed project of supplying water to Kadur and Birur towns from Bhadra reservoir has already been taken up. Drinking water will be supplied to 36 villages, if the project was completed, hence, the Hebbe project is a complete irrigation project. A three kilometres-long tunnel will be built cutting the Bababudangiri hills, about 186 acres of forest will be destroyed and 130 acres of coffee plantations will also be utilised for the project, they explained. “The adverse impact of the project on environment at Western Ghats, which is considered as very sensitive bidiversity spot, will be of intense nature. Bhadra reserve forest, where special scheme is being implemented to protect tigers, has many other wildlife species including elephant, bison, deer and other animals.

 The Hebbe diversion project, which damages the reserve forest, should be dropped at any cost,” they urged.
ADVERTISEMENT