At least four persons have died and half a dozen including a prominent doctor were missing as Mumbai struggled hard to return to normalcy on Wednesday - a day after the 29/8 deluge.

Dr Deepak Amrapurkar, a gastroenterologist with the Bombay Hospital was missing and his umbrella had been found near a manhole in central Mumbai. Madhav Vaidya, an 80-year-old from Borivli western suburbs was also reported missing.

In Thane city, there are reports of at least four missing persons. Three persons including a 2-year-old child died in  two separate  incidents of wall çollapses in  Vikhroli while one person died of drowning.

The road traffic on the highways is returning to normalcy. The Western Railway trains are running but with delays, however, the Central Railway is finding hard to return to normalcy. The flights have reported more than 30 minutes delay.

On Tuesday, Mumbai had received an average 250 mm rainfall - leaving the BMC struggling. "Lashing rain..flooded, water-logged, but so admirable to see Mumbai police, common man helping out, true Mumbaikar spirit," Bollywood superstar Amitabh Bachchan tweeted.

While past midnight, the Western Railway resumed it's Churchgate-Virar service, the main line service on Central Railway between Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus to Kalyan started in morning. The Harbour line, however,  continues to be affected.

According to latest reports, traffic was moving at snail's pace on the Mumbai-Pune  Expressway, Thane-Nashik Highway and Mumbai-Ahmedabad Highway and the Mumbai-Goa route. The schools of Mumbai are closed on Wednesday following the instructions from the Education departments.

Very few people were seen on the roads and waterlogging was reported but the situation has improved as intensity of rains reduced in the wee hours. Heavy to very heavy rains and gusty winds have been forecast by weathermen for Wednesday and Thursday.

Overnight people were seen stranded at several places like railway stations and bus stops. Several took shelter in temples, mosques, churches, gurdwara and Jain temples. The NGOs and temple trusts organised food and tea for stranded commuters.

Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis is constantly monitoring the situation and have asked people to step out only if it is absolutely necessary.

The MMR catchment areas including Sanjay Gandhi National Park and Aarey in Mumbai , Tungareshwar Wildlife Sanctuary  in Palghar and Tansa Wildlife Sanctuary in Thane are receiving heavy rainfall.
The Mithi river in Mumbai is still flowing over the danger mark in some places.