An elderly man adjusting the bolt of a barrel in a dingy shop on Kollapuradamma Temple street, popularly known as KT street, may not catch ones attention immediately, as many are unaware that he is the only licenced gun repairer in the city.

D Keshav, aged 58 years, the fourth generation gun repairer who has inherited the skills from his ancestors recounts that his great grandfather Annachar, started the shop, also kept the armoury of the Palace during the erstwhile rule of Wadiyar’s up and running. Keshav was a young boy when he joined his father in the shop.

From single-barrel to double-barrel, revolvers to rifles, Keshav knows them all. Ask him about guns and his eyes light up. Holding the front portion of a single barrel gun with his left forehand, Keshav talks passionately about the forehand piece. “The butt made of wood is also called woodstock. ADVERTISEMENTOnly two bullets can be loaded and the switch near the trigger has to be adjusted to fire the bullet loaded in right and left barrel. The double barrel gun also comes sans bullet. Here, instead of bullet, the gun powder is filled into the barrels. When shot, the raucous sound is emitted. It is mostly used to scare away the animals,” he says.

Classification

The guns can be classified into hammer gun (single barrel), double barrel bullet loading gun (DBBL), double barrel ‘maddhu’ (gun powder) loading (DBML) gun. The common complaints are vibration and sapped springs.

The walls of the shop have a story to tell with the exhibits of Annachar’s photos and also the letters of appreciation he received for his job. One such is the letter from an army officer who got his weapon repaired through a wing commander Venner, a close friend of Annachar. 

Another is from Ario Gatti, a wildlife photographer from Royal Ontario Museum, University of Toronto, Seoul, South Korea. Gatti was shooting in Bandipur forest here, when the camera developed a snag. A friend of Annachar referred him to Gatti. 
Annachar repaired the camera too to perfection. A black and white photograph dated November 30, 1963 stands testimony to this. 

Torch

On returning home, Gatti sent a three-battery torch to Annachar as a token of appreciation -- all of which has been recorded in a citation framed and proudly nailed to the wall of the shop. 

Keshav said that though the profession was not economically rewarding, it was only the passion to keep the family tradition alive that kept him going. A majority of his customers are farmers and those living in farm houses on the outskirts. 
He said that not many people in the city owned a gun for self-protection. Earlier weapons were the proud possessions of many, especially those who had a passion for hunting.

Keshav’s son Raghavendra, a fifth generation novice gun repairer, has begun to assist his father, kindling his father’s hopes of keeping the family tradition alive.