Taan Bekro, which means music of the sand, is a documentary that takes viewers into the depth of cultures and traditions of Kalbeliyas- the nomadic tribe of Rajasthan. As filmmaker Saumya Sharma attempts to present a poetic journey of these tribal groups, in a deeper sense, shows their isolated lifestyle, where they constantly struggle for existence and social recognition.

In a span of 64 minutes, Sharma brings forward the hardships of Kalbeliyas and the cause of their dying tradition of snake charming through lengthy silent shots and candid words of exchange with the present generation of the tribe. 

“I always thought that since people are losing the habit of reading, how do I make them aware of different communities? Audiovisual mediums like films are perhaps the only way we can learn about different societies and break the existing ethno-centric gaps among people,” Sharma tells Metrolife. 

An anthropologist and a former IT professional, Sharma has spent many years in Rajasthan and hence was aware of the circumstance in these villages in Jaisalmer. “I didn’t have to penetrate much or make an extra effort to break the ice with these people,” says Sharma. 

The film, which was screened last weekend at the India Habitat Centre by Kriti Films Club, has been shot in villages Masoodi, Sumar ki Dhani and Jogiyon ki Dhani of Jaisalmer, over a period of 14 days. It was shot ‘gorilla style’ where research for the film was done simultaneously with the shoot. 

“Since I make films through crowdfunding, doing pre-research becomes difficult. Moreover for topics such as these, you have to go with a fresh mindset and be prepared for cultural surprises,” says Sharma. 

From Hindus burying their dead, to an engaged couple being allowed to share a bed before marriage, there are various aspects about these tribal groups which comes off as a shocker for urban population. “Poverty and lack of enough firewood in a desert can be the main reasons why these Hindus bury their dead. Basically, I wanted to show how tourism is a double-edged sword. It is flourishing in Rajasthan but these people are moving away from their cultures. They say aaj se 10 saal baad koi Kalbeliya sapera nahi rahega,” says Sharma. 

After the Wildlife Protection Act 1972, these saperas weren’t allowed to freely practice snake charming. Today, one of the oldest cultural practices of the Kalbeliyas, is restricted only to high-society marriages, and is on the verge of extinction. 

Drought and lack of earning sources have created such situations for these tribals that they have to neglect their cultures, hop from village to village and even migrate to the city for odd jobs like quarrying and labour. 

On being asked about the most challenging aspect of shooting Taan Bekro, Sharma says, “Shooting at temperature as high as 38 degrees celsius was very difficult. Also, there was no closed washroom in a distance less 50 kilometres from these villages. This was a big struggle.” Looking forward to the screening of the film in Hyderabad, Sharma is also working on another documentary on the Gond tribes of Bastar.