A law student has been arrested for illegally felling teak wood inside Metikuppe Forest Range of the H D Kote taluk in Mysuru district on Monday. 

ADVERTISEMENTPhotographs captured by a camera trap placed inside the reserve, to track the movement of tigers and elephants, helped Forest Department officials nab him.

The two people seen in the photograph have been identified as law student Naveen Kumar and his brother Sathish, residents of Agasamahundi village in H D Kote taluk.

Metikuppe Range Forest Officer Ananya Kumar said the duo's photograph was captured by a camera trap placed near Kallatti Gate at the Range. It showed them moving a thick log of wood on a bicycle. 

Aware of the camera trap, the two were seen in the photograph covering their faces to hide their identities.

The incident came to light when Forest Department officials were conducting a routine check of camera traps to replace their batteries.

“As soon as we got the photographs, we started collecting information about the people who might have been involved in the activity. Officials were soon able to zero in on Naveen Kumar,” said Ananya. 

Naveen was arrested, and two pieces of teak wood recovered from his residence. Sathish is absconding.

During his interrogation, the department learnt that Sathish was the main person behind the crime. 

“The department is probing whether other persons are involved in illegal logging inside the reserves. Naveen, during interrogation, has said a few other persons had also felled trees in the region a few days ago,” said Ananya. 

Naveen, who admitted to the crime, said the tree was felled to be used for some construction work at his house.

“Naveen, who studies in Mysuru, does not have adequate information about illegal logging activities in the region. Since Sathish is the main accused in the incident, we are awaiting his arrest to collect more information,” said Ananya. 

The accused have been booked under Sections 12, 51, 27 and 30 of the Wildlife Protection Act.

Nagarahole National Park Director R Gokul said there were 400 camera traps inside the reserve. 

“This is the first such incident where camera traps have helped nab people involved in illegal felling of trees,” he went on to add.