Fortune tellers in the country have often goaded believers to feed animals, even insects such as ants, to avert misfortune. Somehow, this belief appears to have struck an affable chord with the Punjab government’s efforts to get animals in zoos adopted. 

The initiative to adopt animals and birds has been gasping for breath for the last two years. But thanks to the government initiative to involve people and institutions in the process, the move has injected a new lease of life into various zoos across Punjab.  

In the last few months, close to two dozen individuals have come forward to adopt animals, perhaps on the advice of fortune-tellers, to ward off possible evil effects or hoping that it would bring them good luck , a senior zoo official said.

Requesting anonymity, an individual who adopted an animal in the Chattbir zoo near here, said: “My panditji advised me this option. It was workable. He said this would thwart possible trouble and bring me good fortune.” 

The state wildlife department has made a list of 33 species of animals and birds for adoption, of course with a price tag. The idea behind this scheme is to cut the rising costs of the upkeep of animals in zoos through participation of wildlife lovers, NGOs and institutions.

Vodafone has adopted four leopards for an annual payout of Rs 37,000 each for a leopard. Two Royal Bengal tigers were adopted by Aircel for Rs 84,400 every year. 

“Many of these adoptions last a month or two only, and are then discontinued. People this way are able to contribute to feed birds, peacocks, deer and even big animals. It helps them psychologically,” he said. 

Price tag

The high adoption costs of animals like elephants, hippopotamus, chimpanzee and wild buffalo have been a dissuading factor. The cost of adopting an elephant has been fixed at Rs 2.09 lakh a year, a hippopotamus Rs 1.39 lakh, a chimpanzee Rs 57,100, a wild buffalo Rs 47,700 and a crocodile Rs 46,300.  On the lesser side, a monkey goes for Rs 15,300, a deer for Rs 12,600 and a peacock for Rs 2,800 per year. 

The adoption rates are fixed on the basis of the actual expenditure incurred on an animal the previous year, plus 10 per cent inflation cost. The government has promised certain privileges for those who adopt animals.
ADVERTISEMENT