India has a diverse orchid flora of about 1,330 species under 186 genera and harbours some of the most ornamentally beautiful orchids. 

ADVERTISEMENTIndia has eight regions rich in orchid flora with epiphytic, terrestrial and saprophytic varieties, comprising the eastern Himalayas including the northeastern parts, Western Ghats, Andaman & Nicobar Islands and North West India. Of these, North East harbours the maximum diversity and numbers with as many as 856 species.

There is tremendous potential for orchids in terms of cut flower plants and potted plants. However, India is yet to tap this potential with its own hybrids in the international market. Also, the orchid flora and their habitats are dwindling due to various anthropogenic pressures. One of the most important causes for decline in orchid population is the habitat loss, which is due to several reasons such as jhumming (shifting cultivation) in northeastern parts and diversion of areas for various other land uses. In addition, over collection for commercial use, habitat deterioration and fragmentation have taken its toll on the orchid flora. Forest fires and grazing have also affected the orchid population. Further complicating the matters are pollution and climate change. 

Several of the orchid species which were in existence a few decades ago, have either perished, or lack sizeable population now. Orchids are the indicators of the health of an ecosystem. Orchids highly depend on pollinators such as bees, wasps, other insects and at times, birds for reproduction. This interrelationship mechanism has to sustain if orchids and other biota (total collection of organisms of a geographic region or a time period) have to survive in nature.

As if the diversity in size, colour, and shape is not adequate, diversity in fragrances in these unparalleled flowers adds bonus to this family in the plant kingdom. No other flowering family offers the amount of diversity Orchidaceae offers in every way. Be it the size, shape, colours or markings, orchids offer astonishing array of variations. When a novice sees an orchid flower, he or she enjoys the flower colour, size and the bizarre markings, where as a connoisseur will first smell the orchid for its fragrance.

Fantastic fragrances

About 75% of the orchids are fragrant with varying smells; some are mild and some are strong. The orchid flowers offer a range of fragrances. Some of them smell like a heady combination of wine and perfume and some a mixture of vanilla, mint and chocolate. 

On the other extreme, some of them emit the smell of medicines, rotten fruit, animal excrement, rotting meat and even dead bodies. Among the orchids, cymbidiums (boat orchids) are known to have exclusive fragrance, that of a combination of lily of the valley and a fresh lemon with a tinge of jasmine. The presence of 33 volatile compounds is known to be the reason behind the fragrance of Cymbidium faberi. 

Orchid fragrance is due to the presence of volatile compounds which are stored as essential oils in the periphery of the flowers, roots and leaves in glands known as osmopheres. 

When this volatile compound vaporises at specific temperatures, it emits fragrance and attracts pollinators. Specific fragrances are known to attract the pollinators (insects) to enable the pollination. The flowers will emit the fragrance at the time of the day when the insects (pollinators) are most active.

Bright and large cattleyas generally have a sweet and somewhat spicy fragrance and are pollinated by bees. They emit strong fragrance in the morning and when the conditions are bright and warm. With potential in the perfume industry for fragrance of orchids, many players are already synthesising the components and coming out with perfumes smelling of real orchids.

Saving pretty flowers

When it comes to the conservation of orchids, it has to be taken up from an overall perspective rather than with a piecemeal approach. Identifying the orchid habitats region-wise and then mapping them will give an idea as to what its status is — what we have and where it is. Generally, orchid habitats are forest areas. There are also numerous terrestrial orchids in grasslands and other habitats, highlighting the necessity of a focused survey and mapping of different habitats. 

Once this is done, the process of in situ conservation can be planned. Complimenting this would be establishing botanical gardens and orchidariums in different regions, which will go a long way in conserving the species. India has a number of protected areas in the form of national parks and wildlife sanctuaries that conserve orchids; but apart from these, other orchid-rich areas should be conserved and declared as orchid sanctuaries.

Pioneer saviour

Arunachal Pradesh (the state is also known as ‘orchid paradise’ of the country) was the first to set up such a sanctuary (Sessa Orchid Sanctuary) in West Kameng district. Another one in Sikkim, Deorali Orchid Sanctuary, has also been established. Having a network of numerous such areas and interconnecting them in the long run will ensure conservation of orchids and related biota. 

To check the illegal removal of orchids from its natural habitat, several legislations such as Indian Forest Act, The Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 and The Biodiversity Act, 2002, have been passed. Implementation of the rules concerning orchids under these Acts should be taken up with objectivity. At the same time, there is a need to educate and create awareness about the role of orchids in the ecosystem not only among the general public, but even for those individuals involved in the conservation planning and implementation programmes.

Institutions involved in orchid research and propagation should have programmes with result-oriented approach. It does not just stop at the collection of orchid germplasm (germ cells) of the region, but also extends to propagating species which are attractive and have commercial value. 

Orchids have an interrelationship with other biota in the ecosystem, particularly with the specific pollinators. Many times, this fine-tuned mechanism of interdependence is either taken for granted or not understood clearly. There is a need to comprehend and highlight it in a holistic manner with an overall perspective.  

(The author is former additional principal chief conservator of forests, Nagaland Forest Department)