One of the largest tribes in South Africa, Zulus have a distinct cultural identity. From their everyday rituals to their arts and crafts, Aruna Chandaraju explores the fascinating world of this tribe.

ADVERTISEMENTThe flamboyant colours of her flowing dress; the gorgeous beaded jewellery; and large, striking headgear marked her out as a traditional Zulu woman. She and her colleague stood at the entrance greeting visitors to the international convention in Durban, South Africa. And delegates flocked for a photo-op with these two beautiful Zulu women. The more interested among us sought out information on these aboriginals and their rich ethnic culture. 

It is estimated that there are about 11 million Zulu people in South Africa today. They are considered the largest ethnic group of the country and have an important role in its social, political and economic affairs. 

The Zulus once belonged to a larger group called Nguni, and regard themselves as direct descendants of a chief called Zulu. By the 19th century, they had become a powerful tribe under the leadership of their best-known warrior Shaka, who was celebrated for his fearlessness and war exploits. Later, after conflicts with the British, they aligned themselves with other ethnic groups in the great struggle against apartheid in South Africa, until the first democratic elections took place in 1994.

Zulu beliefs

We were told that the Zulus believe in a god known as Nkulunkulu, and ancestor worship is also a powerful practice in their religion. As their god does not interact with humans in their everyday life, the Zulus depend on regular interaction with spirits. For this, they rely on divination. Diviners and herbalists play a significant role in their daily lives. Ancestors are highly revered and sacrifices and other offerings are used to satiate them. Zulus still rely on Sangomas or traditional healers alongside the practitioners of modern medicine.

Their art and culture form a fascinating tapestry, which has been the subject of much study by anthropologists and sociologists. For the layman, the impressions of their traditions of art are created from the beadwork and basketry, for which the Zulus are duly famous. While it is the women who are largely involved in crafting items like brightly-coloured beaded jewellery, the men are known to create wooden artefacts and objects made of animal skin. Grass is an important element of their creations whether clothes, crafts or utensils. Leaves and natural pigments also figure in their creations.

Talking about clothes, as with many African tribes, the traditional dress among Zulus signifies the social status and stage in life. For example, it would be easy to tell a woman’s marital status (unmarried, engaged or married) from the kind of clothes she wears. Of course, walking the streets of South African cities like Johanessburg, Durban or Port Elizabeth for example, we found that along with women who sported some traditional elements in their clothes (like headgear or ethnic style skirts), there were many who were dressed in western clothes. We later learnt that western wear had been adopted by many urbanites, who reserved traditional attire only for special occasions and ceremonies.

Art & craft

Zulu shields are also well-known and are a favoured purchase by visitors who wish to take home an exquisite piece of Zulu craft. As are masks of various kinds — from benign to fierce-looking ones and from plain, grey pieces to brightly coloured ones. 

We also found exquisite decoupage ostrich eggs, animal horns and drums. Chess sets, figurines and wooden maps were the other objects on sale. Of course, the beadwork of various kinds offered in jewellery (wide bangles and bracelets, neckbands, and earrings in animal shapes, etc.) and desktop objects was the easiest to take home.

Africa has always been famous for its percussion traditions and the Zulus have a large variety of drumming styles. Drums are an integral part of most festivities. They were once made with earthenware pots, but are nowadays made with other materials. 

Among their various dances is the Umbhekuzo, in which men move forward and backwards or away from the audience and the movement is symbolic of the ebb and flow of the tides. The perfect unison and gentle grace with which these dancers move is fascinating to watch and characterises many Zulu dances. Many of the dancers use spears and shields.

Another fascinating spectacle is the Ilikhomba, where a long decorated stick is an important accessory to dance, while the Bull Dance is called so because the dancers mimic the movement of a bull with arms held aloft, while the body or legs land with a strong force. The Hunting Dance, as the name implies, evokes images of hunting, and is an understandably fiery dance with very vigorous movements. 

The Dance of the Small Shield originated during Shaka’s time. All of them make for fascinating spectacles. Taking time off South Africa’s famed wildlife safaris for cultural interactions can be rewarding in more ways than one.