For centuries, the Ganga has been the symbol of purity and sanctity in the country. From its mythical descent from Lord Shiva’s locks to its serpentine path across India and the final assimilation into the ocean; the river plays an epic role in shaping the culture and character of India. And yet while this holy water body ensures a smooth passage to the next world for many mortal souls, the river itself grows murkier every day.

All this because of sewage, industrial waste, animal carcasses, filth, and waste thrown away by worshippers in a hurry to wash their sins. But now, a UK charity has stepped forward to literally resuscitate the dying Ganga. Berkshire’s Thatcham Charity has twinned India’s Ganga with UK’s Thames River and wants to pour life into the river in the same way as the Thames.

Thatchman charity’s Thames River Restoration Trust (TRRT) has committed to use £210,000 for this mammoth project, that will not just help clean Ganga but also teach villagers along the river’s coast how to save the freshwater wildlife and keep sewage away from the waters. 

The money comes from the prize money the charity won during the 2010 Theiss International Riverprize awarded by the International Riverfoundation. It was in recognition of the efforts the team put in to transform Thames from being biologically dead in the 1950s to being one of the cleanest urban rivers in the world. Robert Oates, director of the TRRT charity, says the choice of Ganga was made because of its similarity to the Thames 150 years ago. “India is going through a massive industrialisation like London did last century,” he said. “The government can’t build enough sewage plants to keep pace.”

Dying Ganga and its wildlife
Sadly, Ganga finds its name in the list of the five most polluted rivers of the world. In certain areas the bacteria levels are more than 100 times higher than the limits set by the government. From washing clothes to dumping bodies, the river’s purity is maligned every day and in spite of the alarming levels of pollution, people continue to use the water to drink and take a bath.

The most disastrous effects are felt by the freshwater wildlife. This includes the national aquatic animal Ganges River Dolphin, the Ganga river turtles and the gharial crocodiles. After the Yangtze River Dolphin was declared extinct in 2006, there are now only four species of river dolphins left in the world. The Ganges River Dolphin is classified as endangered by the IUCN and the gharial is critically endangered.

Fishermen and dolphins both cluster in the same shallow areas of the river where small fishes are in abundance. While these fishes are a dolphin’s preferred food, over fishing and shrinking river have forced fishermen to drop their nets here. So while man and dolphin are forcefully hunting mates, the fishing nets are an extra hazard for the dolphins. Poaching also remains a problem where illegal killing of the animals is done to feed the medicine and pet markets of the eastern countries. Not to forget the pollution that is suffocating and strangling the freshwater life forms.

Ushering change
Oates, however, is very confident that he can save India’s dear river and its inhabitants. His confidence comes from a well chalked out plan. The project will work with community groups in more than 20 villages along 1,600 kilometres of the upper Ganga and its tributary, River Yamuna. Villagers will be encouraged to take steps such as planting trees to stabilise riverbanks and restoring ponds to treat waste water.  

They will receive help in shifting to organic farming to boost food production and reduce pollution. They will be taught to rescue the nests and young of turtles and gharial crocodiles, and rear them in special hatcheries for later release in protected areas. 

Poverty-stricken fishermen will be given rope weaving machines to provide an alternative livelihood for their families, and to reduce the pressure on fish stock. Children will learn about the importance of the river for people and wildlife. Also, Indian scientists will visit UK and take first hand information on how Thames was saved.

Pandit Nehru wrote in his book Discovery of India, “The Ganges, above all is the river of India, which has held India's heart captive and drawn uncounted millions to her banks since the dawn of history. The story of the Ganges, from her source to the sea, from old times to new, is the story of India’s civilisation and culture, of the rise and fall of empires, of great and proud cities, of adventures of man.”

His words justly summarise the essence and importance of this river in an Indian’s life. Today, the national river’s polluted waters too reflect how man is polluting and spoiling the environment. While the UK experts clean Ganga, will every Indian replicate the same knowledge to cleanse the whole of India? That is to be seen.
ADVERTISEMENT