The withdrawal came a month after the National Environment Appellate Authority (NEAA) rejected the nod given by the ministry to private firm Careamol Iron Ore Ltd. "The project proponent had submitted false data/concealed data in respect of distance of river, archaeological sites from the project site, forest cover in proposed mining lease area in its Environment Impact Report," the NEAA order said on July 12.

The appeal against Jaisinh Maganlal-owned mining project was filed by Gomantak Shetkari Sanhatana through Supreme Court lawyer Ritwick Dutta. "The mining project was granted environmental clearance in September 2007 by the Environment Ministry even though the project proponent had given wrong information," Dutta said.

He claimed that the company "mislead" the government by declaring in its EIA that the river Kushawati is at a distance of 2.6 km of the project site whereas actually it is at a distance of only 50 metres.

Similarly, the EIA document was made available only in English and the public hearing venue was nearly 40 kms away from the project site. There is also an archaeological monument within a distance of 500 metres which was never disclosed to the NEAA, Dutta said.

Taking note of the petition, the NEAA had directed the Environment Ministry to place the project before the Standing Committee of the National Board for Wildlife (NBWL) as it is located within ten km of Cotigaon and Netraval wildlife sanctuary, a fact allegedly hidden by the firm.

After conducting a site visit on July 15 and 16 to ascertain the site's distance from the river as well meeting the affected people, the NEAA rejected the environmental nod given to it.

"In compliance of the tribunal's order and taking note of the fact that the project proponent have concealed factual information which are essential for appraisal of the project proposal in terms of environmental integrity... the clearance is revoked," said Environment Ministry in its order.

Vedanta's plan to set up a USD 1.7 billion mining project at Niyamgiri Hills in Orissa has to be shelved after the Environment Ministry refused to grant clearance to it for violation of a host of norms.ADVERTISEMENT