Dear Sir,ADVERTISEMENTI am a Class 9 student. I want to become a navy officer. Could you please guide me as to what I should study to take up this career.SanjanaDear Sanjana,Girls can join the Indian Navy after their graduation, but only for Short Service Commission (CCS), which is renewable from 5 to 14 years. Engineers, pilots, logistics and education officers are recruited every year through the UPSC exams (see www.nausena-bharti.nic.in).Since selection is highly competitive, start building up your general knowledge, physical fitness and communication skills.Dear Sir,I am a second year BA student. Please tell me the procedure for studying law in Delhi University and where I can get previous year entrance exam question papers.AkashDear Akash,As a graduate you are eligible to join the three year LLB degree in Delhi or any other university. Selection is through individual tests by various colleges, and it is always better to get the latest rules and dates directly from them. For Delhi University, you can log on to their official website www.du.ac.in.Dear Sir,  I am a Class 12 student (PCMB). I am very keen on Biology-related fields. After my PUC, I would like to take up Nutrition sciences for my degree. However, I am quite concerned that there seems to be not much scope for it. Is there any other professional course that could land me in the same field? My parents are advising me to take up Microbiology or Biotechnology considering the huge scope these two fields offer. Could you please let me know about any such related courses? I am very confused right now. Please guide. GowriDear Gowri,Please do not go by the 'scope' factor, as it keeps changing from time to time, and you will have a working span of at least 50 years after you qualify in any field. You should select your career based on your interest and aptitude. Nutrition is steadily growing as a career, with employment opportunities in hospitals, schools, old age homes, food industry, sports, etc. There are many good colleges offering nutrition courses, and the prime institution for postgraduate studies is the National Institute of Nutrition (see www.ninindia.org/training.htm).  You can also explore careers in agricultural sciences, paramedical fields, wildlife etc.Dear Sir, I am a PUC II student (PCMB). I aspire to join Indian Air Force (technical field). I need to do Aeronautical engineering. But I'm a little weak in Maths and so, my parents are suggesting not to study the subject. Is aeronautical engineering tough? I want to be in the defence sector. So, please guide me.ShirishaDear Shirisha,Aeronautical engineering, like most branches of engineering, obviously involves quite a bit of Maths. And entry into Indian Air Force (IAF) is highly competitive, requiring extensive preparation. Whether you can improve on your Maths depends on what is holding you back, that is, are you poor in the concepts, do you make silly mistakes, is your motivation level low, etc. You can take the help of a good teacher to evaluate and tell you. If you feel you cannot improve your Math, then it may be better to take up graduation in any other field, and you can still join the Indian Air Force in non-technical and non-flying branches.Dear Sir, I am a PUC II student. I have taken Physics, Chemistry, Maths (PCM) and Electronics as my electives. I'm not interested in Mathematics. I'm totally confused about what to do next. I'm people-oriented and have good managing skills. Also, I wish to work independently. Is engineering the only option after opting for PCM? And please let me know about the entrance exams I must take.A StudentDear Student,If you are a people and management oriented person and not very happy with Mathematics, you may explore courses other then engineering.You can consider making a career in fields such as mass communication, psychology, event management, travel and tourism, and HR management. Most of these courses are available in many reputed colleges who conduct their own entrance tests. Your study of PCM will not go waste as it has given you a stronger foundation in science and can be used anywhere.Dear Sir,My son is studying in PUC I, with Physics, Chemistry, Maths and Computer Science as his electives. He likes Physics more than any other subject. But he is not able to do well in Maths. Can you suggest some courses based on Physics that he can do after PUC II? Is there any scope for those courses?A ParentDear Parent,Do check with him if he is interested in going into pure Physics as a full-time career. If so, he can take up a BSc degree, an integrated MS degree or even a four-year BS in Physics from any reputed institution. But keep in mind that you should also evaluate his other traits to know whether after his studies, he would like to be in research, teaching, product development, quality control, etc. The courses he takes up should be based on his long-term goals. If he is genuinely committed and talented, he can have a good future.Dear Sir, I am a Class 12 student. I had to attempt Class 11 twice due to carelessness. Currently, I am preparing for National Eligibility Entrance Exam (NEET). But I am not sure about it and am quite scared. Even if I do not get a seat in MBBS I still want to enter the field of biology by studying Biotechnology. Does it have a good scope in India? Also, which degree should I pursue? Please guide.A StudentDear Student,Firstly, it would be good if you can introspect and evaluate why you had to repeat Class 11, and which subjects you are poor in. This will help you to select fields where those subjects are not required. NEET is a highly competitive all-India exam and you should be prepared for extensive preparation if you wish to qualify.You can also consider paramedical fields such as radiology, optometry, speech pathology and dialysis technology, which are offered as professional courses and are three to four years in duration. Biotechnology is a very wide field encompassing microbiology, biochemistry, genetics etc. Find out whether you would like to be working in health, agriculture, animal or wildlife, forestry or research sectors. Accordingly, you can select the degree course most suited to your goals.