Dear Sir,

ADVERTISEMENTI am studying in Class 10. I wish to get into the research department of Astronomy. What course should I choose? Which are the colleges that offer this course in Bangalore? What is the scope for Astronomy in India?

Anonymous

Dear Anonymous,

Astronomy has limited career opportunities in India. Hence, you should take it up only if you are very passionate about it, and would not mind struggling it out.  You may complete either a B.Sc with Physics or a basic engineering course, and then apply to IIT, BITS Pilani, Indian Institute of Science, or the Institute of Astrophysics (which are highly reputed). Graduating from any of these colleges will ensure that you will get have promising opportunities for research in the best of institutions anywhere in the world.

Dear Sir,

I am a Class 8 student, studying in a CBSE school. Although friends and family members tell me that it is too early to decide, I have made up mind to become a veterinarian. I am told that it has no scope and the field pays very little.  I have the following questions:
- Is there a common entrance exam to get admission into a veterinary college?

- Is there an exam after Class 12 to study in a foreign university?

- Is it better to complete graduation in India and then study in a foreign university?

- Can I get a scholarship?

- Can I get some training during my summer holidays so that it will help me get an admission in a foreign university?

Chinki

Dear Chinki,

It is good that you have set your career goal early in life, it will help you focus and score better too.

Earlier, veterinary doctors had limited job opportunities, but that is not the case now. From government veterinary hospitals to military service, setting up your own clinic, working in corporate organisations providing products and services to animals, the scope is steadily increasing.  You may also choose to become an animal trainer, jungle resort manager, wildlife photographer, or do research or teaching.  Fairly good veterinary education is available in India itself (four-year Bachelor of Veterinary Science) and admission is by entrance exams held by every university separately. Entry is not very difficult, as Karnataka itself has many colleges.  You need to complete Class 12 with Science, and then apply. Limited scholarships are also available.

If you do internships under experts or in good organisations, it adds value to your CV for admission abroad for any post-graduate specialisation you may like to take up.

Dear Sir,

I am a 24  year-old Mechanical Engineer working with a reputed firm. I intend to do an MBA through distance education. Which stream of MBA should I specialise in? And which universities should I apply to?

Chandan

Dear Chandan,

Since you have one year’s of work experience, you will find it beneficial to upgrade your qualifications through a management programme.  Take up a course through distance education only if you are sure that you cannot attend even a part-time or online course.  
The specialisation should be decided by you based on how much you have enjoyed supply chain activity and whatever you have seen of operations.  Since you have had some amount of exposure to both these areas, you should be in a position to decide whether you would like to acquire managerial skills and continue in the same line.  Take up International Business only if you are passionate about it, since it will be a completely new field.


Dear Sir,

I am a Class 10 CBSE student interested in the Science stream.  I wish to pursue a career in medicine. Should I opt for an Integrated College or a Non-Integrated College? Also, tell me about the advantages and disadvantages of both the systems at the PUC level. Which are the best integrated and non-integrated colleges in Bangalore? Is it necessary to attend coaching classes if I choose a non-integrated college?

Ashwini Bhat

Dear Ashwini,

The term ‘Integrated College’ generally refers to one that extends its study hours beyond the curriculum to give coaching for various entrance exams.  Some of them involve long hours and rigorous study, and are suitable only to those who cannot study on their own.  If you are a good student and are committed to your studies, you don’t necessarily need to go to coaching classes, but can seek help in specific subjects on 1:1 basis from some expert from time to time.

Since you are a CBSE student, it will be in your interest to continue in the CBSE stream, which is already proven as the best for any national level entrance exam.  On the other hand PUC curriculum is only now going to be revised to bring it on par with CBSE, and there may be initial hiccups.

Dear Sir,

I would like to know what the study options are after completing a degree in engineering. Please guide me.

Latha 

Dear Latha,

An undergraduation in Engineering is one of the best foundations that allows you to choose any career you may like to take up, technical or non-technical. You do not have to restrict yourself to engineering — start exploring all careers from technology to management, administration, marketing, mass communication, law, civil or military service, teaching, research, etc. You can narrow down to specific goals. Or else, take up an entry-level job to get exposure to the world of work, and that can prove to be helpful for you to decide your future wisely.