Water crisis this summer is taking its toll on the wildlife at Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP) where many animals are being forced to drink polluted water.

ADVERTISEMENTWater is the only cooling agent for these captive animals during the hot weather. Despite being aware of the situation, the authorities have not taken any action to address the problem and supply sufficient water to the 1,300-odd animals and birds housed in BBP.

According to sources, the elephants drink dirty muddy water and lie on the sludge to cool themselves. The 16 elephants housed at the BBP are let out into the forests during the night and they manage to drink water at night at the Donnanna Lake located inside the forest. But during the day, when the water is actually required for these pachyderms to keep themselves cool, it is not made available to them.

Worst affected are the Hippopotamuses, which literally live inside water and come out only to eat. They are now being fed water using a hose pipe. These animals require fresh water and need to stay inside water to avoid any kind of skin infection. Water, which was earlier changed on alternate days, is now changed once every four days. Sources said, on the fourth day, the water would definitely be dirty, which will affect the health of the animals. The requirement is 10,000 litres per day, but the animals are provided with less than half of the required water at present.

There are four tanks inside the herbivore safari of which only two have some water. There are hundreds of spotted deers, nilgais and sambars which require water to quench their thirst. The only borewell yielding water is in the rescue centre area. Sources said zoos in other states provide enough water to tigers and lions to swim in summer, but in Bannerghatta, the animals do not even get sufficient water to drink.

However, BBP's executive director Range Gowda says the Park does not have any water crisis as of now as it has sunk two new borewells. He said more borewells will be dug to meet the water requirement.  Rehena Banu, chairperson, Karnataka Zoo Authority, said she was aware of the water crisis in the Park. 

“I was informed that a Cauvery pipeline runs close to BBP and request has to be made to supply water to the Park. I will visit the Park on April 15 to inspect the water situation,” she added.