The sales of these handy devices surge during festivals owing to sellers offering good discount and freebies with the gadgets.

Point and Shoot (P&S) cameras are popular among youth and elders alike as they are easy to handle, while their complex counterparts the Digital Single Lens Reflex (DSLR) cameras appeal to those who are taking their first steps towards professional photography.

Increasing their popularity is the affordability and attractive offers provided by stores selling cameras. Commenting on the increased usage of P&S cameras, student of Sri Jayachamarajendra College of Engineering, Anush remarked, “For those who are passionate about photography, digital cameras (P&S) are a boon as they are available at affordable prices. They give both automatic and manual adjustment features. So if you want to get into professional photography, you can check out the different manual features in the regular cameras and then move onto SLRs.”

Another student Sagar Swamy observed that trips to nearby places among students are common these days. “Mobile cameras do not yield images with such clarity as digital ones do. So you can capture the time that you spend with your friends and easily upload the pictures onto social networking sites in a jiffy. Our friends wait to post some witty comments about those photographs.“

Focussing on wildlife photography is Nitin who said that P&S cameras are not enough to capture the action in the wild. The basic principle of photography is to control the exposure of light on the film. While SLRs provide this option, regular P&S cameras do not provide such an option. 

Market intelligence company, IDC India's study reveals that digital cameras with prices below ` 10,000 contributed to around 70 per cent of total shipments in the country during the April-June 2010 quarter. According to IDC, the front-runners in both P&S  and DSLR categories are Nikon and Canon.

Digital cameras

According to IDC India, the digital camera market in the country crossed 6,20,000 units for the fist time in a single quarter between April and June 2010. The digital single lens reflex (DSLR) camera category witnessed a growth of 557 per cent in April-June 2010 as compared to April-June 2009. The Point and Shoot camera category saw 69 per cent growth during the same period.

ADVERTISEMENT