The highest peak in Bandipur National Park, Himavad Gopalswamy Betta is a detour destination for those who head to Bandipur or Ooty. It is known for its mystical mist and rich wildlife. Situated at an altitude of 2,800 feet above sea level, this hill is covered with mist for most parts of the year, even during the summer. The hill also has an age-old temple for all the mythology lovers. In fact, the presiding deity of the Temple shares his name with the abundant mist – Himavad Gopalswamy. 

ADVERTISEMENT‘G’ for green

About 10km away from Hangala village on Mysuru-Ooty highway, Himavad Betta falls within the boundaries of Bandipur National Park. Hence, visitors have to go through a rigorous checking process and record their details at the check post at the base of the hill. The journey to the top is something that will mesmerise you. 

As you ascend, you will be treated to spectacular views of the mist-covered hills and valleys. Vast grasslands with stunted trees and huge rocks make for an enchanting sight. Be ready to go through lots of hairpin bends with thick forests on one side and a deep valley on the other. The hilltop on the other hand, is a plain that consists of a parking area, a temple complex, a guest house and some old structures.

If you visit the hill early in the morning, especially in the winter, magical misty views will welcome you. Sometimes, the fog is so dense, that it doesn’t clear till midday. But nature rewards those who are patient. If you wait for just the right amount of time and are lucky with the breeze, you will witness enthralling views of mountains and valleys. But as soon the cold breeze stops, the mist regains its supremacy. This natural game of hide and seek between mountains and the mist is a visual treat. 

Lord’s abode

The Temple was built by Hoysala King Ballala and was renovated by the Kings of Mysore, who were ardent devotees of Lord Venugopala. The Temple has an attractive entrance – a single-tiered gopura. There is a huge compound wall that runs across the entire stretch. The inner porch of the Temple has a lofty dwajastambha (flag pillar) and the inner walls are sculpted with Dashavatara and Krishnavatara. 

The sanctum sanctorum has an idol of Lord Krishna playing flute under a tree. He is in a dancing posture, surrounded by his friends. The central panel also features several characters and icons from Krishnavatara. The melting mist inside the sanctum sanctorum trickles down from the roof onto the idol. The same water is given to devotees as theertha (holy water). Plenty of devotees throng this place on weekends and especially during the annual Brahma Rathotsava during the month of April.

The hill is home to many wild animals like elephants, fox, spotted deer, gaur, sloth bear, wild dogs and the elusive tiger. You can easily spot elephants grazing in thick grassy meadows surrounding the hill. No wonder, this place was the favourite hunting ground of the Mysore Maharajas and their British guests. As this area is in Bandipur 

National park zone, areas beyond the Temple are restricted and also, the area is a plastic-free zone.