B K Singh, the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (PCCF) and Chief Wildlife Warden, has directed forest officers of the Periyapatna and Kushalnagar ranges of the Hunsur Wildlife division, to set up permanent anti-poaching camps at strategic locations. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe PCCF’s direction comes close on the heels of the recent seizure of tiger pelt at Periyapatna by the police. In the first week of April, a police team in the guise of wildlife trophy collectors had nabbed Swamy, a poacher, near Naviluramma temple at Naviluru in Periyapatna, about 60 km from Mysore. The kingpin Venkatappa, 55, had met the ‘buyers’ along with his accomplices, Abhi and Swamy. Venkatappa managed to escape by opening fire in the air, along with Abhi. 

Singh has sought an explanation from the assistant conservator of forests and range forest officers of Periyapatna and Kushalnagar. He said the poaching incident had occurred as the patrol team had become inactive. Singh has directed the chief conservator of forests (CCF), Madikeri Circle, 
Conservator of Forests, (CF), Mysore Circle and deputy conservator of forests (DCF) of the wildlife divisions of Hunsur and Madikeri to seek an explanation from the officials as to why there is a decline in the standard of patrolling. The PCCF has asked the senior officers to lead from the front in patrol operations.

In a letter dated April, 12, the PCCF has pointed out that the tiger was poached by Venkatappa and others using a gun, close to the demarcation lines in Doddaharave, between the Periyapatna and Kushalnagar range. There is enough movement of wildlife in Maldare, Doddaharave, Mavkal, Devmakly and Anechowkur, the letter says.

“A proposal for construction of buildings at suitable locations, besides that for wages and other recurring costs for running these camps be provided in the current year budget on priority,” the letter says.

“The poaching is believed to have occurred on February 20. The tiger bones remained on the spot till they were seized on April 7. It appears the teams are not patrolling the forest regularly. Many instances of hunting in these areas are reported,” the letter said.

The PCCF has also instructed senior officers like CCFs, CFs and DCFs to take up regular patrolling in the forests to prevent illicit felling of trees, poaching of ungulates and carnivores.