Inspiration comes from everywhere for most people. For Arun Hegden, his inspiration to start his journey as a photographer was by following other photographers on social media. 

ADVERTISEMENTHe says, “I started experimenting with my mobile camera in 2011 and I never knew that I would become a serious photographer. My journey has been very unintentional. The next year, I purchased my first professional camera — Canon 550D with a prime lens of 50mm. I learnt a lot from it and the rest of the journey continued.” 

Arun later upgraded his equipment to a Canon 5D Mark III. He specialises in portraits, travel and wedding photography. What is it about these genres that interest him? He smiles, “I am a people person and it’s always nice to meet new ones. I get to hear their stories and present those moments to my viewers.” 
However, he has a few tricks up his sleeves before he takes the mesmerising shots. He says, “I believe that one needs to make eye contact with the subject before you take their picture. Exchange a smile with them and make them comfortable. A small conversation also helps. When the comfort factor kicks in, the picture works out well too.” 

Being in the tech field, Arun has to patiently wait for the weekend before he can head out with his camera. He also plans his off accordingly so that he can explore North India. He enjoys travelling in and around Himachal Pradesh, Ladakh and Rajasthan. “Most of the time, the travel is the one that is planned. The photographs captured here are just part of the travel. One of my favourite pictures is the one I’ve clicked in Ladakh. It was a week-long trip when I was still learning the tricks of the trade of photography. It’s a picture of my friends who went to the lake. It’s simple but absolutely beautiful,” he shares proudly.

Recently, Arun took upon himself to learn astrophotography as well. He says, “I went with a few friends of mine and it was an eye-opening experience. I realised that astrophotography is not too difficult if one has the patience and time. There are certain techniques that you need to follow. But the weather is very unpredictable; I guess that’s the fun part!” In the future, he hopes to become a fashion photographer as he enjoys interacting with people. Wildlife photography is also on his bucket list of things he wants to learn.

He says, “Photography is about presenting my vision with the kind of projects that I do. There’s also art and science behind every picture capture. There are a number of emotion that it portrays. I hope to continue doing the work I do and keep exploring ideas.”