For many Bengalureans, a weekend trip or a vacation means heading out to nature-bound spaces and spending time in the lap of nature. While many of them go with other groups, family and friends, some even go solo. But there are many rules to the game, which these passionate nature lovers share from their own experiences.

ADVERTISEMENTPhotographers often go out of their way to capture the perfect moment and this can leave behind ‘human trails’ in the wild. KV Sarath Chandra Mouli, a nature and wildlife photographer, loves capturing snakes and birds in his camera. “Whenever I see something captivating, I take my own time to get closer to the shot. When I find a snake that I want to click, I stay still as a rock for a bit, unless it is crawling towards me. If it is not moving, I slowly start clicking and get closer to the spot 
carefully. Also, if any other person tries to disturb the reptile or bird, I make sure to let them know that they shouldn’t do that,” says Sarath. 

He adds that it is important to understand the location and its specifics when going to photograph or spend time in the wild. “If there are any local people around, it is always best to interact with them. This happened to me when I went to Kokrebellur. There are storks and pelicans there but my friends told me that they were unable to click any pictures. I checked with the locals around and they helped me find places where I could click great photographs,” he adds. 

Mala Chandrashekar, another wildlife photographer who loves going on trekking experiences, says that she has travelled across the Western Ghats, in places like Agumbe and Kudremukh, and has loved it. “I like travelling with a group of friends and used to go for expeditions every weekend. As a photographer, when on a nature trail, one should take care not to disturb the wildlife around, varying from birds to reptiles to animals, whether nesting or otherwise.”

The ‘leave no trace’ policy is a requisite among all nature  adventure enthusiasts, where they make a point to take back  everything that they carry to the spot with them, including trash. “While trekking, one is bound to get exhausted and end up snacking here and there. Whatever one does becomes a pressure on nature, including travelling in huge groups. It is always better to travel in groups that are not bigger than 20,” says Mala. She adds that a ‘no alcohol and smoking’ policy should also be enforced on every such trip. 

Reusable products and vessels are the way to go while  camping and trekking, says Sunita Suhas, who loves visiting nature spots with her husband Suhas Ramegowda and son Aarav. “We do local spots by ourselves but we travel with a larger group when heading  to other destinations. From avoiding tissues to paper plates and disposable cutlery, we go out of the way to make sure that we do not add any elements to the existing character of a place. We use, wash and put back the vessels into the bag, when at a spot,” details Sunita. 

She adds that while packing snacks, they make sure that they remove all plastic packaging and pack them into resealable boxes. “These boxes are kept away from the sunlight so that this does not interfere with the quality. When refilling water bottles at a stream, we make sure that we do not step into it or pollute it. One should avoid using deodorants and perfumes when at natural spots as these may affect insects and leave trails,” she adds.

Just like hiking or trekking enthusiasts, passionate runners like Shreyas N Karnad also take up adventurous nature trails for a close-to-nature experience. “I’m a running coach and so I love to run with large groups sometimes. 

Littering is a strict no, especially when visiting any nature-bound place. But another thing to make sure is that one doesn’t go off-trail. 

At most places, trails have been marked and one should not try and explore different ways. The wild is the wild and it’s better left alone like that,” says Shreyas.