The project of pumping water from Hebbe reservoir to Madagakere and 36 other lakes is fuelling the possibility of water crisis arising in Bhadra Reserve Forest area. 

ADVERTISEMENTVarious environmental organisations, talking about this possibility have said that the Government has given its nod to the said project of Rs 140 crore wherein 1.45 TMC water will be utilised. Out of the said quantity 0.75 TMC water will be pumped to Madagakere while the remaining 0.70 TMC will be supplied to 36 lakes in the taluk.

Girish from Bhadra Wildlife Conservation Trust and Sridev Hulikere from Wild Cat-C Trust have said that the project has been chalked out blindly without taking into consideration the possible affects of the same within 500 sq km area of Bhadra Reserve Forest. The project has taken into consideration the single point agenda of providing irrigation to cultivable land. 

The activists have said that the construction of the ‘garland canal’ of 29 kms, after constructing the dam will affect the water availability in reserve forest area. They say that the construction of the garland canal will affect Hebbe falls, Hebbe lake (Hebbe fall flows as Hebbekere) and Somavahini lake, which is the meeting point of Hebbe lake and Hebbe fall. Scarcity of water will put the wildlife to trouble.

Since Hebbe falls ultimately meets River Bhadra, the Hebbe Diversion Project will have adverse affect on the inflow of water into River Bhadra. Though the initial project spoke of drawing seven TMC water from Hebbe falls, as per the latest statement issued by MLA Y C Vishwanath the plan speaks of drawing only 1.45 TMC water. 

“There is lot of ambiguity with regard to the nature of the project itself. There is a need for the Government to first clarify the doubts. The Government should also speak about the affect the project will have on the Reserve Forest,” they said adding that there are rumours that three kilometre canal will be dug in Bababudangiri hill range. The activists have questioned the feasibility of the plan which speaks of taking up heavy project of drilling canal in a sensitive area like Bababudangiri.

Already the project of pumping water to 36 villages from Bhadra dam is under progress. The activists said that if an irrigation project like Hebbe Diversion Project is taken up then a minimum of 186 acres of forest land will be lost.

The activists have urged the Government to rethink over the need of the project and have suggested the Government to drop the project.