Though the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) has given clearance to the proposal to declare the Kudremukh National Park as a tiger reserve, the proposal is stuck on opposition from the Karnataka government. Union Environment Minister Prakash Javadekar recently told the Lok Sabha that final approval had been given for upgrade of the KNP and the Rajaji national park in Uttarakhand as tiger reserves. The Kudremukh proposal has been under consideration for a long time but the state has persistently opposed it. The state Assembly has even passed a resolution against the proposal. It can be implemented only with the state’s concurrence. There are five tiger reserves in the state, including Bandipur and Nagarhole. The proposal to make Kudremukh forests also a tiger reserve is part of a national move to increase the 
number of such reserves in various states. Karnataka’s objections to the idea are not convincing. 

ADVERTISEMENTTigers are an endangered species and special efforts have been made in the country under Project Tiger to conserve them and to increase their numbers. The 
last census has shown an uptick in numbers at the national level but much more has to be done to maintain the trend. Better protection measures in existing tiger reserves and setting up of more reserves are part of the conservation plan. Conservationists have felt that Kudremukh forests are most suitable for a tiger reserve. There are a few tigers in the forests and declaration of the area as a reserve and taking measures to protect them will help turn the area into an ideal habitat for tigers. 
The opposition to the proposal is mainly on political considerations. Elected representatives from adjoining districts like Udupi, Chikmagaluru and Dakshina Kannada have led the opposition. A major ground of opposition is that the lives and livelihood of families living in the forest area will be adversely affected. But many of them have expressed their readiness to get relocated. A good relocation package will help ensure their rehabilitation and welfare. There is a misinformation campaign from vested interests aimed at local inhabitants to make the idea unacceptable to them.

The Kudremukh forests, spread over 600 sq km, are ecologically important too. They have a special ecosystem, with a rich diversity of plants and trees and wildlife other than tigers. They have suffered from encroachments and exploitation of its natural resources. Declaration of the forests as a tiger reserve will help preserve them better. The government of Siddaramaiah should reconsider its decision and accept the proposal.