Rescuing whooping cranes
ADVERTISEMENTOfficials with the Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries (LDWF) are finalising plans to release a small flock of whooping cranes (Grus americana) in a protected wetland, in what could be a promising step toward long-term viability for an endangered species. 

The move would represent the return of a long-lost native – absent from that state for more than 60 years. Officials say that 10 captive-bred birds will be flown by plane from their Maryland hatching ground to the White Lake Wetlands Conservation Area in Vermilion Parish, southwestern Louisiana. Once released into the wild, they will be monitored by the LDWF. The Department of Wildlife and Fisheries hopes to establish a non-migratory flock of whooping cranes in White Lake over the next 10 years to help ensure the survival of the species. 

Gwyneth Dickey Zakaib
Nature News

Study reports rise in heavy precipitation
An increase in heavy precipitation that has afflicted many countries is at least partly a consequence of human influence on the atmosphere, climate scientists reported in a new study. In the first major paper of its kind, researchers used elaborate computer programmes that simulate the climate to analyse whether the rise in severe rainstorms, heavy snowfalls and similar events could be explained by natural variability in the atmosphere. They found that it could not, and that the increase made sense only when the computers factored in the effects of greenhouse gases released by burning of fossil fuels. The likelihood of extreme precipitation on any given day rose by about seven per cent over the last half of the 20th century, at least for the land areas of the Northern Hemisphere for which sufficient figures are available to do an analysis.
The principal finding of the new study is “that this seven per cent is well outside the bounds of natural variability,” said Francis W Zwiers, a Canadian climate scientist who took part in the research. 

The paper, published in Nature, covers climate trends from 1951 to 1999 and therefore does not include any analysis of last year’s extreme precipitation, including catastrophic floods in Pakistan, China and Australia as well as parts of the United States, including Tennessee, Arkansas and California. However, the paper is likely to bolster a growing sense among climate scientists that events like the 2010 floods will become more common.

Scientists have long been reluctant to attribute any specific weather event to global warming, but a handful of papers that do so are beginning to appear in the scientific literature. One such installment published in Nature as a companion piece to the broader paper finds that severe rains that flooded England and Wales in 2000, the wettest autumn since record-keeping began there in 1766, were made substantially more likely by the greenhouse gases released by human activity.

The analyses can be expected to draw fire from climate-change contrarians, who have long scoffed at computer simulations of the climate. They point out that such programmes cannot fully capture the complexity of the real world.

Justin Gillis
New York Times News Service