A fresh spell of heavy rains is likely to hit Assam and Arunachal Pradesh that are reeling under a wave of floods even as north India continues to witness an erratic monsoon activity.

ADVERTISEMENTThe weatherman has warned of "heavy rains" in Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam and Meghalaya, Bihar, Haryana and Delhi tomorrow.

Delhi, which had been putting up with hot and humid conditions for about a week now, had scattered rains today that kept the maximum temperature below 35 degrees Celsius mark.

Humidity, however, continued to soar high and was recorded between 66 and 89 per cent. The maximum in the city was 34.6 degrees, while the minimum settled at 28.3 degrees.

The flood situation in Assam remains "critical" with the waters of a swollen Brahmaputra river and its tributaries submerging houses and agricultural fields of 12.5 lakh people in 18 districts, besides inundating rhino homelands in Kaziranga National Park and Pobitora Wildlife Sanctuary.

Assam State Disaster Management Authority said the deluge has also washed away chunks of main roads in Morigaon, Jorhat and Dibrugarh districts snapping road connectivity, and breached river embankments in Kokrajhar, Jorhat, Bongaigaon, Dibrugarh and Golaghat districts causing water to rush into vast tracks of human habitation.

The flood-hit districts are Lakhimpur, Golaghat, Bongaigaon, Jorhat, Dhemaji, Sivasagar, Barpeta, Kokrajhar, Nagaon, Dibrugarh, Chirang, Goalpara, Tinsukia, Dhubri, Morigaon, Sonitpur, Biswanath and Darrang districts.

The army, SDRF and NDRF are assisting the district administrations in rescuing the affected people to safer places.

An adult male rhino drowned in a flooded river in KNP and its carcass was recovered near Siga camp under Agoratoli camp.

The flood situation in Arunachal Pradesh also turned worse with the waters of Noa Dehing river submerging NH-52 in Namsai district.

More than 100 families of Lekang village in the district and Jairampur sub-division in Changlang district were rendered homeless in the fresh wave of flood.

Deputy Chief Minister Chowna Mein visited the flood affected villages of Dirak Miri, Rajabeel, Silatoo, Eraloni and Mahadevpur IV to take stock of the situation.

The flood situation under Chongkham circle in the district also remained grim as the water levels of the Lohit, Kamlang, Berreng, Tengapani rivers and its tributaries are rapidly increasing.

Northern India experienced an erratic monsoon activity, with rains lashing parts of Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh but eluding Haryana and Punjab, where residents grappled with high humidity.

At most places in Haryana and Punjab, the maximum temperature was recorded between 35 and 39 degrees Celsius.

The weatherman said heavy rains are likely in Rajasthan tomorrow.