It is the time to pack your bags and head out of the city. With Christmas and New Year just around the corner, Bengalureans are deciding where they can head out to celebrate in style. While many are planning to go to their hometowns, many others are heading to holiday destinations for a fun-filled weekend. 

ADVERTISEMENTKanisha Gulwadi, a content developer, is looking forward to a fun trip with her family and friends to Kundapur. She says, “We had visited a homestay there during summer and wanted to go back once again. It’s a quintessential place where the gate of the homestay directly opens on to the beach. It is absolutely beautiful. We are going with a different set of friends, so I am sure that the experience will be a rather exciting one.”

As they are leaving next week, she says they will have plenty of time to indulge in various activities in the premises. “The kids will have a lot of fun building sand castles and playing on the beach. The adults, on the other hand, want to relax, unwind and have a good holiday. As it is winter, the weather shouldn’t be too harsh on us either,” she adds. 

Also looking for an adventure this holiday season are Avinash Bhatt and his wife Deepti, who are heading to Kerala this weekend. Avinash, a marketing manager, has a few things planned for their stay in Palakkad. He says, “I have been there a couple of times but this week will be different. I will have a bit more time on my hands and I can head to nearby tourist spots as well. We want to visit the Guruvayur Temple, a few of the dams and the wildlife sanctuary as well. It is the kind of vacation that is a perfect break from the city life; the scenic beauty is just what we are looking for.”
The couple plans to drive down from Bengaluru on Thursday and return on Sunday. “This weekend is just perfect for this trip as we will be exploring new places. Being a vegetarian, it might be difficult to get the kind of food I am looking for, but a good ‘sadhya’ will definitely put a smile on our faces. We also have a few family members living in the state whom we are planning to visit,” he explains. 

Many others are looking forward to beating the winter chills and heading to a sandy beach. And the one place that many prefer visiting during this time of the year is Goa. 

However, for Akash Devidas, a consultant, Goa is the place he calls home. He says, “I’m going to Goa, my hometown, after six months. I moved to this city five years ago and this is the first time I am going for Christmas and New Year.  So I am going to take complete advantage of it.”

Being a localite, he hopes to go to some parties and have fun. He says, “I’m excited to meet my school friends and spend time with my family. It is going to be crazy for Christmas and New Year in Goa as many outsiders will also be coming. I’m looking forward to party, have fun and make the most of this holiday season.”

However, many are disappointed with the holiday falling on a Sunday. 

Most have added in a few of their casual leaves, adjusted with their colleagues and planned their vacation accordingly. Nevertheless, they are still making the most of it and ensuring that they have a jolly good time.