The who’s who of bird watchers’ fraternity will congregate at the scenic Kali Tiger Reserve (KTR) in Uttara Kannada district from January 8-10, taking part in the second edition of the Karnataka Bird Festival.  

ADVERTISEMENTThe participants include leading photographs, ornithologists and wildlife experts. It is the first such festival to be held in a tiger reserve of the state. 

The first edition of the bird festival was held in Ranganthittu Bird Sanctuary in March 2015. 

Over 150 people will participate in the festival, 100 of whom have already made online registrations and 50 are locals and day-long visitors. Many ornithologists from Bengaluru, Delhi, Pune and Mumbai are participating in the event. It will be inaugurated by Forest, Environment and Ecology Minister Ramanath Rai and Tourism Minister R V Deshpande.
 
The list of speakers include Hornbill conservator Aparajita Datta (who will speak on issues confronting Hornbill conservation), bird photographer Megh Roy Choudhary (Journey into the world of bird photography), Suhel Quader, Prof at National Centre for Biological Sciences (Citizen science in bird conservation), Divya Mudappa from Nature Conservation Foundation (Hornbill conservation: experiences from Western Ghats and Narcondam) and wildlife enthusiast Sarath Champati (Birding in the poles). 

The recently released documentary on Kali River would also be screened during the festival. Dedicated bird walks on all three days will be held with ornithologists. 

The interest of people is increasing so much that apart from arranging accommodation in Anshi and Kulgi Nature camps, Jungle Lodges and Resorts properties and forest department inspection bunglows, the department has joined hands with five private home stays on the outskirts. 

The aim of holding the bird festival here is to build a brand for the tiger reserve. Apart from allowing people to know more about the reserve, the idea is to focus on other aspects of wildlife. There is a need to have a shift focus among tourists, said KTR Director K Srinivasalu.