Animal rights activist Maneka Gandhi has written to Chief Minister Siddaramaiah urging him to take action against chief wildlife warden G S Prabhu for his alleged involvement in several scandals and malpractices.

ADVERTISEMENTGandhi alleged that Prabhu was totally unfit to be in the post and was tarnishing the name of the government.

The letter cites a number of alleged scandals, including the recent Elephant for Hire where Prabhu and his staff were reportedly caught in a sting operation receiving money to rent out elephants for private functions.

The Central Zoo Authority had issued a notice to the State government banning captive elephants at the Bannerghatta Park from being hired for private functions. Prabhu allegedly also allowed a private firm, L&T, to capture monkeys at Bengaluru International Airport. A complaint in this regard was received by the office of CWLW on July 27.

CWLW issued a blank official letter without permitting the Deputy Conservator of Forest concerned to inspect the spot and check on the number of monkeys and their species. A letter was issued by CWLW to Bangalore Bruhat Mahanagara Palike (BBMP wrongly mentioned) to capture and translocate monkeys at the HAL officers quarters. The letter did not mention the number of monkeys and it simply meant that all monkeys will be killed, Gandhi’s letter states.

A no-objection certificate was issued to the principal chief conservator of forest (PCCF) Kerala permitting Bhaskaran from Bellandur to hire two elephants for Ganesha festival celebrations. The elephants were exposed to crackers, loud music and their tail hair was sold by the mahouts. The revellers also jumping from top of the animal with Karnataka flags and other such violations had been observed at the Ganesha festival in Kerala, the environmentalist’s letter stated.

“On elephants being brought from other states, Prabhu says he was helpless as the animals arrived with the required documents and he simply provided them with an NoC, thus encouraging the rampant hiring of elephants by event management companies,” Gandhi’s said.

Even in the Dasara howdah case, CWLW testified that the howdahs were all right for the elephants because “they would show pain in their eyes if they were ill treated.”
“Is this the kind of illiterate and corrupt person who should head the department,” Gandhi asked.