A complaint has been filed before the Lokayukta against Housing Minister M H Ambareesh and top officials of the Karnataka Housing Board (KHB) for acquisition of agricultural land to the extent of 2,220 acres in five villages near Anekal for the formation of Surya Nagar Phase Four. 

The farmers from the villages – Kadu Jakkanahalli, Indanavadi, Baggana Doddi, Bommanadanahalli and Konasandra – met Lokayukta Justice Y Bhaskar Rao and stated that the process of notification under Section 4 (1) of erstwhile Land Acquisition Act was against the rules and that the lands notified were fertile.ADVERTISEMENTThe complainants have named chairman of KHB S G Nanjayanamata, Principal Secretary (Housing) Sanjeev Kumar, KHB Commissioner V Yeshwanth and other officials in the complaint. According to the complaint, though barren lands were available in abundance, the KHB proposed to acquire the fertile land by falsely identifying it as a barren land. As per the notification, KHB intends to acquire 1003 acres and 18 guntas of land in Kadu Jakkanahalli, 405 acres and 15 guntas in Indalavadi, 258 acres and 27 guntas in Baggana Doddi, 497 acres in Bommanadanahalli and 55 acres and 28 guntas in Konasandra villages. 

“After the notification was published in the newspapers, farmers filed their objections and requested the government to drop these lands from acquisition. Besides the fact that the farmers are engaged in agricultural activities in all these lands, the very land also falls close to Bannerghatta National Park. Hence, the acquisition had to be in consonance with the Forest Conservation Act, National Wildlife Conservation Act. The KHB has not followed these while issuing notification under Section 4 (1) of Land Acquisition Act,'' the complaint stated.

Venkatesh Reddy, a farmer, said that Chief Minister Siddaramaiah as Opposition leader in the previous government had supported them. “Today the same government is encouraging the acquisition. The land notified for acquisition has several lakes and the state government has reserved funds for the development of these lakes in the budget.'' The farmers met Lokayukta and requested him to hold an inquiry.