With the severe floods and landslides claiming 77 lives in Assam, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and UPA Chairperson Sonia Gandhi have decided to visit the affected areas on Monday.

ADVERTISEMENTAn official said on Sunday that 61 people died in floods and 16 in landslides, while six more were reported missing. An official report said all the 27 districts have been affected by floods while landslides have occurred in three districts. It said the Brahmaputra and Kapili rivers were flowing above danger level at various places.

Singh and Sonia Gandhi are expected to reach Jorhat by a special flight to conduct an aerial survey of Majuli island, which has suffered serious damage in the flood. They will also visit other areas to take stock of the situation.

From there, the UPA leaders will come to Guwahati and hold talks with ministers and senior state government officials before returning to Delhi.

The government report said 2,166 villages across 113 revenue circles in the state were hit and 19.37 lakh people affected. The National Disaster Response Force personnel have been deployed in 16 areas. Rescue operations are on in nine districts. Besides, seven teams of army personnel have been deployed in Barpeta, Dhemaji, Dima-Hasao, Sibsagar, Sonitpur and Tinsukia districts.

Large segments of the Kaziranga National Park remained under water. In Pobitora Wildlife Sanctuary, 80 per cent of the area inhabited by rhinos is under water.

In Meghalaya, around 75,000 people were on Sunday left homeless as flood-swollen Brahmaputra and Jingiram rivers submerged hundreds of villages along their banks.
“So far no casualty has been reported. A general alert has been sounded in the area,” Pravin Bakshi, West Garo Hills district administrator, said.

Supply of relief materials and essential commodities to the affected people has already started and around 15 camps was also set up to provide temporary shelter to the homeless.

Around 75,000 people were rendered homeless due to the back flow of water in the Brahmaputra in Assam and Jingiram river in Meghalaya submerging hundreds of villages including government schools in Phulbari, Rajabala, Nollbari, Islampur, Bakshi said.