Numerous folk troupes and tableaux, with their music and scintillating action, added special flavour to the world-famous ‘Jamboo Savari,’ the last leg of the Dasara festivities on the premises of the Mysuru Palace on Tuesday.

ADVERTISEMENTThousands thronged the palace to witness the 406th Jamboo Savari procession. The heavy rains during the procession left everybody drenched, but did not deter them from cheering the cultural troupes.

The Mysuru Zilla Panchayat tableau highlighted the role played by the queens of Wadiyar dynasty in the overall development of the Mysuru state. Models of the erstwhile queens of the Yadu dynasty attracted the crowd. Maharani Doddammanni’s contribution to the construction of the Krishnaraja Sagar dam (KRS) by pledging her jewellery, Lakshmammanni’s  achievements in reclaiming the kingdom from the hands of usurper Tipu Sultan, the contributions of Devarajammanni, Lingarajammanni, Vani Vilas Sannidhana and Krishnarajammanni were highlighted.

Chief Minister Siddaramaiah performed puja to Nandi Dhwaja at 2.16 pm. The procession ended at 5.08 pm, after the chief minister showered flower petals on the idol of Goddess Chamundeshwari, praying for the overall prosperity of the state. The procession reached Bannimantap at 6.53 pm. In all, 42 tableaux and 62 cultural troupes were taken out.

The tableau from Dharwad district, depicting the sacrifice of Lance Naik Hanumanthappa Koppad, who died in the Siachen avalanche, brought sad memories to the people.

The Health department’s tableau on the awareness against dengue, with a huge red mosquito, and skeletons holding cigarettes in their hands, to highlight the ills of smoking, was attractive. The tableau depicting the beautiful Channapatna dolls represented Ramanagaram district. The Sathyagraha Soudha of Mandya and Gomateshwara of Shravanabelagola in Hassan district, announcing the Mahamastakabhisheka in 2018, also attracted attention.

The drought-like situation across the state and the Cauvery agitation did not dampen the spirits of the people.

Cultural troupes

Members of the cultural troupes dressed as demons and gods, besides the acrobatics by folk artistes enthralled the crowd. Troupes which participated are Hulivesha from Udupi district, Band Pathak from Uttara Kannada district, kolata, kangilu nritya, tamatemela, hagaluvesha, beesu kamsale and maragaalu. 

The other tableaux were the Kannada and Culture department’s Karnataka - 60 years, tribal community from Kodagu district, solid waste management from Koppal district, Someshwara temple from Kolar district, Sri Kshetra Kaivara, Chikkaballapur district, wildlife (Tourism department), Kalpatharu Nadu from Tumakuru district and ‘Janatheya Kadege Bharavaseya Nadige’ by the Information department.

Prize-winning tableaux (ZP category)

Mysuru Zilla Panchayat (Contributions of Maharanis)
Ballari ZP (Lakshmi Narasimha idol at Hampi)
Samanathege Saptha 

Yojane (Chamarajanagar)

Tableau depicting the 125th birth anniversary of Dr B R Ambedkar (special prize)

State-level prize 

winners (departments)

All India Institute of Speech and Hearing (AIISH)
Tourism department (wildlife)
Health department 
(consolation)

Cultural troupes

Dalapatta, Kathivarase and Mullu Chakra (Koppal district)
Maragaalu (Mysuru dist), Garudi Gombe and Keelu Kudure (B’luru Rural)
Gombe Kathakali Nritya (Dharwad dist)