With the railway budget coming as a disappointment, people of Hassan, Mandya and Chamarajanagar districts, are now pinning their hopes on the Union government led by Narendra Modi, who will present his maiden budget on Thursday. 

ADVERTISEMENTThough Chamarajanagar district is abound with natural resources and a lot of tourist places, it lags behind in development of tourism industry, due to lack of funds.

The district comprises Bharachukki falls, Male Mahadeshwara Hills, Hogenakkal falls, Himavad Gopalaswamy hill, Bandipur, Biligiri Ranganathaswamy hill and several others which draw hundreds of people every day. Chamarajanagar district is the only district in the State housing two wildlife sanctuaries and two tiger reserve forests.

While Tamil Nadu government has developed the Hogenakal falls coming under their limits and boosted tourism, the Karnataka counterparts are facing problems as the region comes under the wildlife sanctuary. A minimum of 10 acres land is required to develop the falls, which can be taken up only after the land is transferred as per the law. 

With a lot of tribals in the district, the department of Tourism can give an impetus to environmental tourism and gain popularity at the national level.

 This may provide job opportunities to the locals and also increase the government’s exchequer. It may be recalled that upon the Centre’s suggestion, a report was submitted in this regard with an estimation of Rs 100 crore to the BJP government in State, three years ago. But the whole effort was put on the back burner.

A few development works have been taken up in the Bharachukki falls, but they are not up to the mark, opine visitors. Farmers growing turmeric, which is one of the major crop in the district are hoping for a processing unit in the district as they are currently dependent on the traders of Erode, in Tamil Nadu, as there is no exclusive processing unit in the district. 

There is also a demand for a Sainik School in the district, as its topography is conducive for the same. 

Mandya

The people of Mandya district are expecting that the Centre will give its nod to their demands of setting up of a Kendriya Vidyalaya, development of tourism and opening of a Women’s bank, in the budget presentation.

Though Mandya district was formed 75 years ago, its demand for Kendriya Vidyalaya is still pending, while the other new districts have been sanctioned the same. 

Concerted efforts had resulted in the Centre giving an approval, but fund allocation for the same has not been done. 

Mandya has houses top popular tourist destinations like KRS, Brindavan Gardens, Srirangapatna, Muthathi and others, and district-in-charge Minister Ambarish had submitted a Rs 200 crore proproposal to the Centre through the State government. 

But, the UPA government had rejected the same. Another proposal of Rs 100 crore had been submitted again, which is awaiting funds.

A cancer hospital assured by former MP Ramya, bank run by women, which was sanctioned in 2014, are yet to be approved.

The district is behind in industries and the industrialists demand industries coming under Central government and give a boost to industries.

Hassan

The people of the district who are dependent on agriculture are hoping that the government will responds to the problems faced by the farmers and announce a pro-farmer budget. They hope that the Centre announces agriculture as the profit making industries. 

They also seek a research centre to test soil to provide valuable suggestions to the potato growers. The farmers of Sakleshpur and Belur have demanded projects to protect coffee and cardamom crop. 

Their demands included processing units, warehouses, basic amenities, and installation of solar and wind energy projects to generate power.