While enthusiastic Delhiites celebrate Independence Day by flying kites, few of them are aware that many birds get injured and die due to their short-lived fun. July to August sees a sharp spurt in the number of birds getting wounded because of glass-coated kite strings. The cases are highest in Old, West and East Delhi, where kite flying is popular. 

ADVERTISEMENTSaurabh Gupta, an animal welfare officer in People For Animals (PFA), says kite flying is loved in the Walled City and a lot of people are into pigeon racing in that area, leading to injuries to birds. “Kite flying and pigeon racing is common here. The place is densely populated too. So more birds, especially eagles and kites, get wounded. Besides, we also rescue a lot of injured birds from Muslim dominated areas like Seelampur, Shastri Nagar etc.,” he informs. 

If the weather is good, even more number of people get onto their rooftop to fly kites, causing injuries to birds. When it is windy, more birds get entangled in glass-coated strings, dying a slow and painful death. 

Nadeem Shehzad of Old Delhi, who started a helpline (9810029698) two years ago to rescue injured birds, says big birds like eagles or kites get deeper cuts because of their heavy weight. “Delhi has a huge population of eagles because of the high number of slaughter houses. They are the ones who get more and deeper cuts by glass-coated strings. Smaller birds like pigeons, crows and owls can change their movement easily seeing the string; but because of their heavy weight, it is not possible for eagles to change their direction suddenly,” says 34-year old Nadeem, who has rescued more than 60 birds this season. 

He also runs a small bird hospital Wildlife Rescue at his home in Shah Ganj, where he treats the injured. A lot of them die before any help can reach them. “Some of them are noticed when they are dead already, while many perish because of blood loss,” he says.

Nadeem, a student of BSc from Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU), does the noble work with his brother. 

Even though glass-coated kite flying string is banned in many cities, it is freely sold in the Capital. Campaign coordinator at People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) India, Bhuvaneshwari Gupta says, “All kinds of birds like pigeons, crows, owls, kites, eagles, hawks get injured because of dangerous manja. This includes species on the verge of extinction like the white-rumped vultures.” 

“The glass-coated strings are so sharp that it can be fatal for human beings too. Birds are of course more fragile. If you want to fly kites, why not use cotton strings,” she says.

The organisation has called for a pan India ban on glass-coated manja.