Kerala Chief Minister Oommen Chandy on Wednesday met his Karnataka counterpart Siddaramaiah and appealed to him to ease the ban on night traffic on the national highways 212 and 67 cutting through the Bandipur Tiger Reserve.

ADVERTISEMENTChandy also sought to explore the possibility of reducing the duration of the ban from the existing 9 pm to 6 am to 10 pm to 5 am and a convoy system where a vehicle from the Forest department will escort a group of vehicles safely to both ends within a restricted speed of 30 km per hour so that there is no threat to the movement of animals.

Addressing the media along with Chandy, Siddaramaiah said that the Kerala government had sought permission to allow 20 vehicles of the Kerala State Transport Corporation, ferrying people on both sides, instead of the existing 16. 

“The movement of vehicles on the Bandipur Tiger Reserve roads has been banned following an order from the Supreme Court to protect wildlife. The three proposals will be examined and discussed with the legal experts and wildlife experts. We have sought two months’ time,” he said.

“The government will take a decision in connection with the proposals mooted by the Kerala chief minister in two months. The officials of both the states will be in touch. After examining the issue, we will file a joint petition before the Supreme Court,” Siddaramaiah added.

Chandy said, “We are ready for any conditions imposed, including speed restriction, introduction of barricades all along the stretch,” he said adding that “the Kerala government is under severe pressure as the ban is affecting the economy in four districts Wayanad, Kannur, Kozhikode and Malapuram.”

“We too are in favour of wildlife conservation. But we need to look into the problems of the people,” Chandy added.

#In fact, the State government had developed two roads at a cost of Rs 73 crore to ease vehicular movement between Kerala and Karnataka after the apex court banned the movement of vehicles through the tiger reserve.

When asked why the demand to lift the ban even after the State provided an alternative route, Siddaramaiah reiterated saying that the government had not considered any proposal but sought two months’ time.

Principal chief conservator of forests and chief wildlife warden, Vinay Luthra, made a powerpoint presentation explaining frequent accidents involving wildlife at the Bandipur Tiger Reserve.

When officials from Kerala went defensive stating that the death of animals was more during the daytime, additional chief secretary Madan Gopal reacted saying that it was false and Karnataka had sufficient evidence to prove it.

Haris, John play host to Chandy

The Kerala delegation led by Chandy that arrived at the Vidhana Soudha was received by a few Malayalam-speaking legislators from Karnataka. Shantinagar MLA, N A Haris and MLC T John gave the delegation a warm welcome. Haris, who received Chandy at the entrance of the Vidhana Soudha near the Kengal Hanumanthiah statue, took him to Siddaramaiah’s chamber. He introduced Chandy to the Karnataka ministers. Haris, who has his roots in Kerala, was seen with Chandy most of the time.