Not many people run the risk of giving up a plush job to chase their passion. But Arun Bhat and Shreeram MV consciously decided to put their earnings into doing something that they liked — photography. They point out that the decision to get into it full-time was not easy. But the two have no regrets at all today. 

Arun and Shreeram started pursuing their passion for photography separately. Being an avid traveller, Arun was interested in travel photography. He worked on various aspects of travel photography —  landscapes, architecture, people, culture and, occasionally, wildlife. Shreeram started off as a naturalist and a birdwatcher. He was drawn towards the camera as a documentation tool and quickly developed the passion to be a wildlife photographer. “We had met on a couple of trips and realised that our approaches to photography were fairly different, because of the different genres we specialised in. We learnt a lot from each other, not only in terms of photography techniques but also field skills,” explains Arun. He points out that this association sowed the seeds for ‘Darter Photography’ — a place where photographers of varied skills and experiences could travel and take pictures together, nurturing the art and techniques of photography through their interactions with each other. 

The duo confess that opening a start-up was not easy. “We got a lot of support from our earliest travellers (many of whom still travel with us). Their timely feedback, helped us learn the ropes quickly and set standards that we follow to this day,” explains Shreeram. He recalls that they would go on travel photography tours, to places like Ladakh, Lahaul and Spiti, Bhutan etc. “These are dream destinations for more travellers, with the added advantage of a dedicated photography group travelling with them,” he adds. 

Their experiential wildlife photography tours have taken them to places like Western Ghats, Kutch and Andaman. “Wildlife photography in India is primarily focused on the big cats. For a country like India, this is like focussing on the proverbial tip of the iceberg. Our wildlife photography tours focussed mainly on experiencing the various habitats — from rainforests of Western Ghats to the deserts of Kutch and Rajasthan to the islands of Andaman,” states Arun. 

‘Darter Photography’ has people who are open to new experiences and learning through travel. The initial days were tough, recall Arun and Shreeram but now they’ve not only widened their network but learnt a great deal in the process. Of all their tours, The Himalayas holds a special significance for them both. “The place presents the best of travel and photographic opportunities, with the most challenging terrain. Ladakh is one of the places where we've visited both in summer and winter,” recollects Arun. Shreeram pitches in saying, “Pangong Tso Lake is another revelation — the deep blue waters of the summer are a sight to behold. And in winter, the lake freezes over. Even the waves look like they've been frozen beautifully.” 

There are a lot of different kinds of people who join Arun and Shreeram on their photographic tours. “We've had people from aged between 10 and 75 years traveling with us. They could be students, doctors, engineers, homemakers, managers, entrepreneurs, CEOs, civil services officers, teachers and even servicemen from the armed forces,” they say.  And the one thing that binds them all is their common love for photography.