As the government has lead a large tract of land for quarrying at Navilugudda, the local residents are worried over the possibilities of danger to natural resources as well as wildlife.

The Department of Mines and Geology has given permission for granite quarrying at 15 acres of land (Survey No 51), a gomala land at Shivapura village, Tarikere taluk, in the district. According to the available information, the Department has leased the land for a period of 30 years to three people to quarry ornamental stone (green marble). The land abuts Navilugudda and remnants of the fort built during the rule of Nayaka chieftains. thus triggering concerns over its future.

Senior geologist Dr Mahesh said that the permission has been given on the basis of a No Objection Certificate (NOC) issued by the district administration and also the Forest Department.

While preparations are underway to start quarrying, the locals are worried about the water tanks, the agriculture activities nearby, the groundwater, the water table and also the forest in the vicinity.

Shivapura, Kudloor, Amrithapura and the hilly regions in the surrounding areas come under the Western Ghats. The fort and Navilugudda act like natural barriers against strong winds, thus ensuring rains. Hence, they are popularly known as ‘Malegudda’ (Hills that bring rains). 

Although a small patch of forest exists, lakes are in abundance, with the Puttegowda lake, the Chatnalli lake, Doddakere, Kollarahalli Kere, Nakinakere and Arasinakere lake situated in the vicinity.

The historical fort was built during the reign of Raja Sarjappa Nayaka, while the habitat of peacocks has made it popular by the name ‘Navilugudda’, although the area has a considerable population of other wild animals like leopards, deer and also bears.

Fretting over the latest development, the villagers from Kudloor, Pundanahalli, Shivapura, Mundre and Koratikere have submitted a memorandum to Deputy Commissioner G Satyavathi. They have already staged a protest once, but in vain.

Panchayat Development Officer Kumar Nayak claimed ignorance over the permission for quarrying, although the land comes under Kudlur Gram Panchayat.

On the other hand, the villagers have alleged that the Forest Department personnel have forged records as gomala land, although it is a deemed forest, in reality.

The volunteers of Vruksha Laksha Andolan have alleged that permission has been given in violation of various laws related to forest, wildlife and also revenue besides Panchayat Raj Act.

Environmentalists list such cases in the past, where quarrying has taken its toll on ecology. The Bhadravati forest division that had, in 1976, boasted of 52% of forest in Tarikere alone, has been reduced to having 24% forest cover. The recent development may signal the end of the existing green cover, they have expressed worry.

Anantha Hegde Ashisara, Prof B M Kumaraswamy and Dr T V Ramachandra from Vruksha Andolana have decided to launch a movement in this regard.