In a bid to boost the tourism potential of Karnataka, around 30 businessmen and investors on Monday signed memoranda of understanding (MoUs) with the State government, which involved investments to the tune of around Rs 1,800 crore towards various initiatives in the State, aimed at all-round development of the industry.

ADVERTISEMENTThe MoU signing, which took place at the Investors Forum in the PATA Travel Mart 2015, drew many keen investors wanting to partner with the State government in many tourism initiatives.

Businessman Kushal Shetty signed an MoU to set up a plan to re-circulate the water of Jog Falls, Shivamogga. With a total investment of around Rs 1,000 crore towards Karnataka’s tourism initiatives, around Rs 750 crore of it, will be towards the Jog Falls’ water re-circulation plan. 

Besides, as part of the public-private partnership, around 10 km of the surrounding areas will see the improvement of infrastructure, connecting roads, and walking tracks, besides building a light aircraft landing strip and helipad. 

Also, the construction of luxury cottages, a five-star hotel, a budget hotel, agri tourism, and an international hospital has been planned. The remaining Rs 300 crore is being set aside for the development of Shivamogga Airport.

While the overall plans are expected to be realised over the next five years, the Jog Falls water re-circulation idea may take just one-and-half years to fructify.

Many other investors are investing around Rs 800 crore in total towards developing various areas of tourist interest in the State. A few of the areas include resorts and spas, wellness, wildlife, golf, and heritage, among others.

Ozone Group is investing a total of Rs 200 crore towards several eco-tourism initiatives spread across Mysuru and Kodagu districts, while Ropeway and Resorts has signed an MoU to invest Rs 70 crore towards introducing ropeways on Chamundi Hills, Nandi Hills, Brindavan Gardens, and Lalbagh, among others.

Meanwhile, Orange County Resorts and Hotels has planned to set a hospitality project in Harbog Village, Kumta taluk, Karwar district, investing Rs 47 crore.