Environment activists have charged that some farmers are trying to illegally cultivate onion on the land belonging to Amrit Mahal Kaval at Basur in the district.

ADVERTISEMENTAccording to rules, there is no provision to  grow commercial crops on Amrit Mahal Kaval land.  Bhadra Wildlife Conservation Trust activist D V Girish, Wildcat Member C Sridev Hulikere and State Wildlife Board former member S Girijashankar  said some farmers had cultivated onions on Kaval land last year too. Some officials are ‘cooperating’ with the growers for personnel benefits, they charged. 

He said Amrit Mahal Kaval land holders are allowed to grow staple foodgrains on two acres land.  The produce can be used for consumption and the grass should be handed over to the Amrit Mahal Breed Conservation Centre, Ajjampur, to be used as feed for cattle being reared at Amrit Mahal Kaval land, according to a new order. But, the centre’s officials and its joint director at Birur have flouted all the rules and have allowed the growers to cultivate onions last year, they claimed.

The green activists charged that the growers had misused hundreds of acres of land belonging to Amrit Mahal Kaval to cultivate onions and earned lakhs of rupees as profit last year. The officials have been backing the illegal activity.The Kaval land has been fenced and the land is being levelled for cultivation now. This will result in scarcity of fodder for cattle. Some others are also involved in the name of Kaval land holders, they claimed. 

They said the state government has declared the land as community conservation reserve area. The Forest Department has been directed to conserve the species which are in the verge of extinction in the plain region. But, the department officials have failed to construct lakes and watch towers. 

They are also not initiating any measures to stop the illegal activities. The Kaval land is being encroached upon due to the negligence of the officials of the departments concerned, the green activists charged. They urged the district administration to ban the cultivation of commercial crops on the Kaval land and take action against the violators. The deputy commissioner has to intervene in the matter to carry out action as required and preserve Amrit Mahal variety of cattle, they urged.