HR internship
Aditya Birla Asset Management Company is hiring an intern for Human Resources (HR) profile in Bengaluru and Puducherry. Students with relevant skills can apply by August 8. The stipend is Rs 4,000 per month. Apply at http://bit.ly/DH-153.

Business Development
DHFL Pramerica Life Insurance Company is hiring interns for Business Development profile in Chennai, Kochi, Hyderabad, and Bengaluru. Students proficient in English can apply by August 11. The stipend is Rs 8,000 per month. Apply at http://bit.ly/DH-154.ADVERTISEMENT
Internship story contest
Internshala, the internship and trainings platform, has launched its annual internship story contest. Students and graduates irrespective of their background can share their interesting internship experience and get financial rewards and goodies worth Rs one lakh. You can submit your story by August 31 on bit.ly/YIS-2017.
F1 in Schools
Time of Sports, a sports consultancy start-up, has organised The F1 in Schools™ Technology Challenge in India. F1 in Schools™ is an international STEM (science, technology, engineering, mathematics) competition for school children (aged 9–19), in which groups of 3–6 students design, test and manufacture a CO2 powered balsa wood Formula 1 miniature “car” using CAD/CAM design tools. Registrations are open till September 25. To know more, visit www.timeofsports.com.
Eximius 2017
Eximius 2017, an entrepreneurship summit at the Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore, will be hosted by the students from August 4 to 6 at the campus. To know more and to register, log on to www.eximius-iimb.com.

Action fellowship
Gandhi Smriti & Darshan Samiti, Government of India, is inviting applications for Gandhi Darshan And Action Fellowship Program 2017 from interns and Junior Research Fellows. The programme is for individuals who have keen interest in Gandhian ideology and are willing to work in collaboration with individuals and institutions under the concept of community participation.

Candidates of age 24-40 years, who arepostgraduates or doctorates, with a deep interest in the Gandhian concepts of constructive work through community participation will be preferred. The last date to apply on https://auth.mygov.in/ is August 6.
Short film contest
The Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) (DEPwD), Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, is organising a short film competition on Divyangjan Sashaktikaran 2017. The last date to apply is August 8. To know more, visit www.mygov.in/node/270151.
Career research award
The Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB) is inviting applications for Early Career Research (ECR) Award 2017 from young researchers who have initiated their early research career in key areas of science and engineering. The last date to apply is August 10. To know more, visit serbonline.in/SERB/HomePage.do.
Letter writing competition
India Post is inviting applications for the All India Letter Writing Competition ‘Dhai Akhar’ 2017-18. The theme is ‘Dear Bapu (Mahatma Gandhi) you inspire me...’ and it can be written in English, Hindi or any local language. There are two categories: Inland Letter Card in 500 words and Envelope category/A-4 size paper in 1000 words. The last date to apply is August 15. To know more, visit www.indiapost.gov.in/vas/Pages/IndiaPostHome.aspx.

Poetry contest
Wordweavers Poetry Contest 2017 is inviting applications from students above 16 years of age. Interested candidates have to write poetry in about two to 100 lines. The language of the poetry must be English only. The last date to submit is August 15. To know more, visit wordweavers.in/contest_guidelines.html.

Wildlife quiz
Wild Wisdom Online Quiz, WWF India 2017 is inviting applications from students of Classes 3 to 12. The objective of this quiz is to sensitise students about India’s rich biodiversity and natural heritage. The selected students will receive certificates and prizes. The last date to apply is August 15. To know more, visit quiz.wwfindia.org/wwq/about.aspx.

Short film proposals
TVE Biomovies 2017 is inviting short film proposals. The objective of the competition is to create a one-minute film idea about the environment and sustainability.

There are two categories: Invasive Alien Species and People & protected area. The last date to apply is August 18. To know more, visit biomovies.tve.org/en/information/rules-and-conditions/.

Friendship essay contest
India-Korea Friendship Essay Competition 2017 is inviting application for students of Classes 7 to 9 to write an essay on ‘What I like about South Korea’ in 150 to 300 words and the senior Classes 10 to 12 on ‘Why I want to visit South Korea’ in 300 to 500 words. The winners can win a free trip to Korea. The last date to apply is August 8. To know more, visit www.koreaindiaessay.com/instructions.html.
Panchayat Raj University
The Karnataka State Rural Development and Panchayat Raj University (KSRDPRU), Gadag, is inviting applications for full-time and part-time faculty, (purely on a temporary basis) for the academic year 2017-18. Applications on a plain paper along with their CV and supporting documents shall reach the Registrar, Karnataka State Rural Development and Panchayat Raj University, Gadag-582 101 on or before August 7.

For details, visit www.ksrdpru.in. Applications for admission to several two-year postgraduate programmes are also invited in the prescribed form. Candidates shall submit duly filled-in application along with a fee to “The Registrar Karnataka State Rural Development and Panchayat Raj University, Raitha Bhavan, General Cariappa Circle, Gadag-582101, either in person or through speed post, on or before August 5, and up to August 7 (5 pm) with a penalty.

Innovation Initiative
The Confederation of Indian Industry, the Department of Science & Technology, Government of India and the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) are inviting young innovators for India Innovation Initiative 2017. This year, the focus is on the human aspect, developing key entrepreneurship skills of innovators for maximum impact. The last date to apply is August 20. To know more, visit www.i3.ciiinnovation.in/noc-programme-details-2017.php.
Scholarship for women
OLM Malala Yousafzai Scholarship 2017-18 is inviting applications from women applicants only whose age should be 30 years or more who want to go back to school to start or continue interrupted studies in the Arts and Design field.

It requires a 500 to 1000 words essay written in English about a challenge you have faced and how you overcame it. The selected women will be awarded $ 1000. The last date to apply is December 1, 2017. To know more, visit www.onlinelogomaker.com/scholarships-for-women.