The Kunbi community that lives in the forests of Joida and other parts of Uttara Kannada and Belagavi districts migrated from Goa about five centuries ago, in their attempt to uphold their identity and safeguard their culture and tradition from Portuguese invasion. They live in scattered village settlements amidst semi-evergreen and moist deciduous forests of Joida taluk. Once members of enormous households (more than 50) they have least interest in material possession. 

ADVERTISEMENTTheatre is the most popular medium of entertainment even to this day. Elders recall times when some families would have a troupe of its own to entertain other members. A Kunbi village is a cluster of houses belonging to the same clan. Now joint families have got split, but the ownership of the land rests with the elder-most. The plots are assigned to individual families on a common agreement. Recent government schemes have resulted in the construction of new houses and toilets.

Kunbis are pious followers of nature, which is evident in their lifestyle and traditions like the ‘border system’ (gadi padhati), where each village strictly adheres to its set borders while fishing and collecting forest resources. Though non-vegetarians, they do not eat domesticated animals.

Members of the community dare to give the slip to a bear that comes by when they are in the forest for collecting firewood, herbs or some fruit. Such is the courage circumstances have instilled in them. Patagudi cannot afford to own dogs as leopards visit the village everyday. Every village has many wild stories to tell.

Over the years they have evolved a lifestyle that makes them independent of outside support. Initially they practised shifting cultivation and grew finger millet, pulses and vegetables until the practice was banned in the 19th century. Now there is a gradual shift in the mode of cultivation and the choice of crops, but their forest dependant lifestyle remains the same. It has helped them develop a deep knowledge of the terrain, observe fruiting and flowering cycles and ensure judicial use of its resources. They have a knowledge of about 75 types of Non-Timber Forest Produce in their daily lives, 16 of which have commercial value. Kunbis do not yield to competition while collecting forest produces and follow the rules of nature. Once the produce is found ripe for harvest, the entire village gathers at one place and the village priest, known as mirashi performs a pooja, signalling the beginning of the harvest season for the produce. 

Kunbis cultivate about 20 varieties of tubers, which are important sources of nutrition for them. Sahyadri Wildlife and Forest Conservation Trust with the support of Department of Science and Technology is working with growers to explore its potential as a livelihood security crop.