According to estimates of the district administration, properties worth Rs 14 crore has been damaged following heavy rain in Kodagu in the last one week.ADVERTISEMENTAs many as 128 houses have been damaged in the three taluks of the district. Compensation has been disbursed for 85 cases.A total of 1,347 electricity poles were uprooted and a total of 1,100 electricity poles have been replaced.Chescom has not yet been able to restore power supply in Soorlabbi, Hammiyala and other surrounding villages, said Revenue Minister R V Deshpande.Deshpande inspected the rain-affected areas in the district and directed officials to take up immediate relief measures.The minister also visited the landslide on Konanooru-Makutta state highway connecting Kerala.Vehicular movements have been disrupted following the landslides since July 12.The distance between Perambadi and Makutta is 20-km. The landslides had occurred on 60 locations in the stretch.At 12 locations, the landslides have damaged the highway as well. In a few locations, the entire road is on the verge of collapse.The Forest Department should give permission for clearing the trees that are on the verge of getting uprooted beside the national highway, said the Revenue Minister.After clearing the fallen soil and debris, experts should inspect the highway. Deshpande directed officials to initiate efforts to widen the highway.The Revenue Minister said, “Kodagu received more than the average rainfall after 25 years. The DC’s account has Rs 10 crore to provide immediate relief for rain victims. If the district administration submits a revised estimate on the loss, then additional funds would be sought from the Central government.”He clarified that the state government has not given permission for the proposed railway line connecting Mysuru-Talassery in Kerala.The Kerala government and Central government have been pressurising us to give permission for the project. However, the state government will not bow to any pressure. The route will not benefit Karnataka. The proposed railway line will also affect environment and wildlife in the district, he added.Later at a review meeting, he directed officials to carry out relief work for the loss of properties following the recent rainfall on a priority basis.He said a detailed report on the damage to roads with photographs should be handed over to PWD Minister HD Revanna during his visit to the district on Tuesday.“The rain has extensively damaged the roads and bridges in the district. There is
a need to repair it. The damage to the highway will be brought to the notice of PWD Minister. There is no shortage of funds for the repair works,” said the minister.He directed the officials to visit the spot to prepare a report on the loss of properties. The relief should be distributed immediately.It is not right to distribute relief of Rs 5,000 for the loss of a house. The power supply should be restored within two days, he added.MLA M P Appachu Ranjan said that about 25 to 30 electricity poles have been damaged in Kalooru, Hammiyala, Kumarahalli.“Even after a week, the power supply has not been restored. The linemen should respond immediately,” said Ranjan.MLA K G Bopaiah said. “There is a shortage of staff in Chescom. Several electricity poles have been damaged in the recent rainfall.”Bopaiah said that the state government should support paddy cultivation. The government should provide financial assistance for the paddy and maize growers in the district.Agriculture officer K Raju said that paddy is grown on 30,500 hectares of land while maize is grown on 4,000 hectares in the district.