The Forest Department has decided not to rescue and rehabilitate the two surviving abandoned cubs in the Antharasanthe range in Nagarahole National Park. There were three cubs, and one of them died on July 31, reportedly due to starvation. The cub’s carcass was found near Bisilvadikere.

Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) B J Hosmath told the Deccan Herald on Monday that the department would not make attempts to rescue the eight-month-old cubs. “I have consulted experts and they have said that it is not advisable to rescue and rehabilitate them. Bringing them to a zoo is not feasible as the cubs are already in a critical condition. They are very weak. Mortality is part of the natural process, and it is not right on the part of the department to interfere at this juncture by darting them,” he said. Hosmath also said he had consulted authorities at the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA), informally, and had been given a similar opinion.

The officer however said the department would keep up its exercise of tracking the mother, which has been missing for nearly 10 days. “We are hoping against hope to track down the mother. However it truly depends on luck. I’m not sure if we will be able to reunite them,” he added.

Conservator of Forests and Director of Nagarhole Tiger Reserve S Manikandan said that 12 camera traps had been laid, while 50 to 60 field staff were combing the area for the mother. The tigress is said to have abandoned her cubs after she sustained injuries in the eye and limbs after being pierced by porcupine quills. “The tigress was sighted even after she sustained these injuries. Though there are rumours that she might be dead, we will keep up the combing operations for a few more days,” he said.

A few days ago, pictures of the cubs were posted on social media by tourists who sighted them during a safari. Ever since news about this spread, a lot of tourists visiting the Kabini River Lodge have been making a beeline to the area in the hope of spotting them.

Manikandan said that since it is a tourism zone, with hundreds of people going on safaris, it is difficult to regulate traffic in the area. 

Conservation zoologist and tiger expert Ullas Karanth said it was best to leave the cubs alone. “Nagarhole is a well protected and high density tiger population reserve. There are a lot of instances when tigers get injured and die. This is the law of nature. The department has made the right decision,” he said. Karanth, however, said the department should regulate traffic in the area, by closing routes, to stop tourists from venturing into the area.