District in-charge Secretary and PWD Principal Secretary M Lakshminarayan directed the district-level officials to come ready with the follow-up report on the decisions taken during the review meeting chaired by Chief Minister Siddaramaiah last year, to the progress review meeting supposed to be held under the chairmanship the CM shortly.

ADVERTISEMENTThe progress review had been scheduled to be held on Thursday, however, the CM is expected to participate in the Suraj Samavesha in Bengaluru the same day to mark the completion of six years of Dr G Parameshwara as KPCC president. So, the date of the CM’s meeting is yet to be finalised.

Lakshminarayan was speaking during a preliminary review meeting ahead of the CM’s meeting, here, on Wednesday. “The departments should mention about the amount of money spent on the development projects and their utility in the reports. As all taluks of the district, except the stretches which have irrigation facility, have been declared drought-hit, the tahsildars should submit a hobli-wise report of drought relief works taken up,” he said.

Below par rainfall

Deputy Commissioner D Randeep said, since January 1 to October 25, this year, an annual average of 727.6 mm rainfall was expected, but the district received only 408.3 mm rains, resulting in a deficit of 44%. Hence, drinking water have to be supplied to villages and towns in tankers in the next couple of months. Taluk-wise data has been collected on the availability of water and the demand in the next few months,” he said.

The DC said, in urban regions, there are a total of 228 wards across the district and the supply of drinking water has been reduced to once in two days in 157 wards. Only 71 wards are getting water daily. Arrangements have been made to supply water through tankers,” he pointed out.

Crop loss on 1.25L hectare

Speaking about agriculture, Randeep said, out of 2,38,795 hectare of rain-fed farmlands, crops have been lost on 1,25,342 hectare, which is a loss of 49.74%. A primary report on this has been prepared, he added.

Lakshminarayan pointed out that scarcity of water will also affect wildlife in the forests and the district administration should be prepared to tackle the problem. 

“Lakes and ponds that have completely dried up should be identified in Bandipur and 
Nagarhole forests and filled with water like done with agriculture ponds, by covering the bed with polythene sheets. The Forest department can use Mnrega funds for the purpose. As the trees and bushes have dried up in the forests, steps should be taken to avert forest fires. Besides, fire tenders should be stationed near the forests to face any eventuality,” he said.

“The departments concerned should collect information about the number of livestock and availability of fodder in the district. They should take steps to set up fodder banks as per demand. The departments should also submit estimation for taking up drought relief works in the next couple of months. Information on the progress of multi-village drinking water projects should be provided and also about the funds required to complete them,” Lakshminarayan said.

“The officials should submit department-wise progress report and directions should be issued to the departments, which have spent less than 60% of the allocated funds, to expedite works and achieve the targets. Those who have not achieved 60% target should come to the CM’s meeting with valid reasons,” he warned.

Zilla Panchayat CEO Shivashankar, Additional DC T Venkatesh and probationary IAS officer Lakshmipriya were present.