Fascinated by the great diversity of life forms? Keen on fathoming the conjunction the ecosystem operates in? Then, Regional Museum of Natural History (RMNH) in Mysuru is the place to be in.ADVERTISEMENTLocated on the banks of Karanji lake with picturesque Chamundi hills in the backdrop, the museum was established in 1995. The informative display of various aspects of natural history in the museum offer insights into the biodiversity and a sundry of ecosystems in South India.Impressive exhibits  Spanning over six acres, the museum houses many galleries with a judicious mix of specimens, and discovery and activity spaces. On entering the museum, one is greeted by a group of elephants 'moving' in the forest, designed on a platform. "These wired elephant models grab the visitors' attention as soon as they enter the museum," says S J Shrinivasan, a senior exhibit preparator.    Inside the museum, one comes across a section with a repository of specimens which the visitors are allowed touch, inspect and explore. This is called the discovery  centre. As part of the museum's Touch, Feel and Learn (TFL) model, the 'do touch corner', offers an interactive experience of the anatomy of vertebrates and other species. There is also an artificial 'sand pit' in place to help viewers understand the marine environment and its intricacies, besides a monthly exhibit corner. The star of this section is the skeleton of a 36-foot-long whale, with a storyline woven about the giant mammal and its habitat. There is also space for hands-on activities, where children, in particular, can paint, build models, and make animal masks or costumes. They also get to be young scientists for a day in the laboratory corner.  A variety of galleries under the 'Biological Diversity' section bring to the fore major eco-systems and biodiversity of South India. Themes depicting the need for conservation and wise use of natural resources are on display here. Further, galleries presenting the basic concepts of natural history and geological, plant and animal heritage are exhibited.A dioramic depiction of the Western Ghats, its importance and impact on the climate and vegetation is enticing. A section on tropical rainforests elaborates on the various insectivorous plants, canopy levels, birds, butterflies etc, found in such regions.A gallery dedicated to wetlands and other ecosystems includes displays on mangrove forests, marine ecology, riverine habitat etc. A panel shows River Cauvery, from the point of its origin at Talacauvery in Kodagu district to the point where it meets the ocean in Tamil Nadu. The panel also shows various landmarks, and cultural, biological and geological points along the river.     Outdoor modelsThe 'Life through Ages' section illustrates the evolution of life. A walk-through tunnel leads one to a throwback of eras, Phanerozoic, Cenozoic, Mesozoic and Paleozoic, culminating at the emergence of modern man. Adding to this is a dioramic representation of 'jurassic period', which is popular among visitors.  Naturalistic exhibits of king cobra, Nilgiri  tahr and wild boars are noteworthy. Wildlife photo exhibits displayed on the walls make for an interesting viewing. Films related to natural history and wildlife are screened on a daily basis in the museum's theatre. The theatre can also be pre-booked by those interested.    The botanical  garden at the museum is a distinct offering for the differently abled, especially the visually challenged. Interpretations through Braille labels and audio commentary helps them understand nature and its diversity.On the list of activities organised at the museum, G N Indresha, scientist and head of office, RMNH, says, "We organise periodical workshops on the protection of environment and preservation of wildlife for general public, apart from camps for students and nature enthusiasts. Besides, teacher-orientation workshops and seminars on diverse themes like ecology and biodiversity are conducted on a regular basis in collaboration with the government and civil society organisations."    Divya, a student who visited the museum recently, says, "It is a great place to be and understand the ecological interrelationship. It is a very informative and lively environment, especially for children."  Rajneesh N, a tourist adds, "It's a good place to be in for environmentalists and those who appreciate natural sciences. It has a good ambience, is well maintained and clean."The museum is open on all days except on Mondays and national holidays. For more information, call  0821-2447046.