With the Koorgalli Rescue and Rehabilitation Center of Sri Chamarajendra Zoological Gardens nearing completion, the Zoo is all set to tie up with the Institute of Wildlife Veterinary Research (IWVR), Kodagu, for conducting research. The MoU is aimed at encouraging research on conservation and wildlife and also to provide first hand experience about wild animals at the Center to veterinary students of the Institute.

ADVERTISEMENTSpeaking to Deccan Herald, B P Ravi, Executive Director of Sri Chamarajendra Zoological Gardens said that works at Koorgalli Center was almost completed and was likely to be inaugurated in the month of January. “As soon as it is inaugurated, the MoU will be signed, following which a hospital, laboratory and other basic facilties will be set up for research,” he said.

Rescue
He said that the Center will help in the rehabilitation of all species of animals. “Currently, even though there is a shortage of space, the Zoo always allows tigers caught in the wild to be treated here. However, we are not that keen on taking in leopards, as there is little space to house them. The Center will put an end to all these problems,” he said. 
 
Moreover, the Center will also prevent the risk of infection, which the Zoo animals face, when a wild animal is being treated at the Zoo. “Even though, such cases have not been reported, there is always such threats. By having a dedicated facility for rescue efforts, these issues will be sorted,” he added.

Funds sought
Following the rescue and rehabilitation of tigers at the Zoo, Ravi said that the Zoo the Forest department had agreed to pay the cost incurred by the Zoo in cases of rescue and rehabilitation of tigers.

Noting that maintenance of a tiger was a costly affair he said that Tiger Conservation Funds, which is provided to various reserve parks, had been sought as maintenance cost for the rehabilitated tigers. Even though Mysore Zoo is ready to offer assistance in such cases for tigers, expenses incurred by it should be met by the department, he said.

He added that as of now, Mysuru Zoo has 14 tigers, of which seven were rescued and rehabilitated from the wild.