DRAMA

Play on 

ADVERTISEMENTDramanon is staging the English play ‘SIC’ at Ranga Shankara on November 1 (7.30 pm) and 2 (3.30 pm and 7.30 pm). The playwright is Melissa J Gibson and the director is Sharanya Ramprakash. 

For online booking, log on to www.book­myshow.com, www.indianstage.in

‘Rafta, Rafta…’

Akvarious Productions (Mumbai) is presenting Rafta, Rafta… by Ayub Khan-Din from November 8 to 17 at Jagriti Theatre, Whitefield. There will be no show on November 11. The show is at 8 pm on all days except Sunday when shows are at 3 pm and 6.30 pm. For bookings, call 7829593342.

‘Pinocchio’ 

Sanchari Theatre is performing the play ‘Pinocchio’, a children’s play, on October 31, 7.30 pm at Ranga Shankara.

‘Isha Rumi..’

Sunaad is presenting ‘Isha Rumi: Beyond Form’, a theatrical juxtaposition of ‘The Ishavasya Upanishad’ and ‘The Masnavi of  Jalaluddin Rumi’, sung in Dhrupad, will be held at Jagriti Theatre, Whitefield on November 2, 8 pm and November 3, 3 pm. It will also be held at Alliance Francaise on November 7, 7.30 pm and November 8, 7.30 pm. 
For online bookings, log on to www.bookmyshow.com

DANCE

Kathak festival

Nrityanidhi, the kathak dance institute, is celebrating its annual kathak dance festival Dhwani on November 9 at Alliance Francaise. The theme is Nazakat, which is a combination of ghazal and kathak. A few famous ghazal numbers to which the team would perform are Aaj Jane Ki Zid by Farida Khanum, Tumko Dekha To Ye Khayal by Jagjit Singh and Yu Saja Chand by Asha Bhonsle.


‘Rangapravesha’ 

Rasika Arts Foundation is presenting the bharatanatyam rangapravesha of Varsha Venugopal on November 2, 6.30 pm at ADA Rangamandira, JC Road. She is a disciple of Kiran Subramanyam and Sandhya Kiran. 

Bharatanatyam 

The Indian Council for Cultural Relations will be presenting a bharatanatyam recital by 
Yamuna Bhagwat, under the ‘Every Friday Cultural Evening Programme’, on November 1, 6.30 pm at Yavanika, State Youth Centre, Nrupathunga Road.

‘Kavya Bhagina’ 

Kavya Bhagina, a show representing Kannada poetry through dance, will be held at Alliance Francaise on November 1, 7 pm. The concept is by Shrinivas 
Kappanna.

MUSIC

In collaboration 

MES Kalavedi, in collaboration with ‘Swaramurthy VN Rao Memorial Trust’, is presenting a special concert on the occasion of ‘Veena Seshanna 161st Jayanthi’ on November 10, 6.30 pm at the new conference hall, MES College, Vidyasagara Prof MPL Sastry Road, 15th Cross, Malleswaram. 

There will be a vocal recital by Sikkil Gurucharan. He will be accompanied by HK Venkatram on the violin, HS Sudhindra on the mridangam and Sukanya Ramgopal on the ghatam. 

Paying tribute

Parveen Begum Smruti Music and Educational Trust is presenting a musical tribute to Ustad Abdul Khadar Khan, Pandit Basavaraj Bendigeri and Parveen Begum at Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan. 

On November 2, 5 pm, a sarangi jugalbandi will be presented by Farooque Latif and Sarwar Hussain. 

There will also be a vocal recital by Venkatesh Kumar and bansuri by Sameer Rao. Kathak will be presented by Rajendra and Nirupama 
Rajendra. 

On November 3, 5 pm, a sarangi solo recital will be rendered by Sarfaraaz Khan. There will also be a vocal recital by Ustad Arshad Ali Khan. 

Makaran Tulankar will present a tabla solo recital and Ustad Faiyaz Khan will 
present vocals.

‘Metal Factory...’

‘Metal Factory 3.0’, an evening dedicated to metal as a music form, featuring ‘Theorized’, ‘Final Surrender’, and ‘Demonic Resurrection’, will be held on November 3, 
6 pm at CounterCulture. 

Tickets are available on www.bookmyshow.com and at the venue.

Original flavour 

DJ and Grammy-nominated producer Thomas Olsen, better known by his stage name Tommy Trash, will perform on November 9 at Bengaluru Marriott Hotel, Whitefield. 
For details, log on to www.bookmyshow.in 

Live concert

Krafting Success productions is bringing Farhan Akhtar live in concert on November 9, 6 pm at Jayamahal Palace. Farhan will perform with his band for two hours at Jayamahal Palace drumming out hits from his films like Dil Chahta Hai, ‘Rock On’, Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara, Bhaag Milkha Bhaag, poems and other tunes. Tickets are available on www.book­myshow.com or call 39895050.

Fine sound

The band ‘Jeremiah Ferrari’ from Manchester, UK will present a concert on November 2, 8.30 pm at BFlat, Indiranagar. Ryan Barton will be on vocals and guitar; Joshua Aitchison will be on lead guitar and backing vocals, Hanson Pollitt on bass and backing vocals and Stu Welch on drums. 

The four young men in ‘Jeramiah Ferrari’ fuse reggae, rock, ska, punk, and more to create a sound both heavily influenced by the likes of Bob Marley and Sublime, yet unique enough to call their own. 

Beautiful mix

‘Tritha Electric’ will present a concert at BFlat, Indiranagar on November 1, 8.30 pm. The band has Tritha (Hindustani vocals, Tibetan prayer bowl), Mathias Durand (electric guitars), Lazlo Kovacs (percussions) and Paul Schneiter (drums). 

Tritha is a Hindustani classical trained singer from Kolkata-turned punk musician and activist. Supported by her band from Paris, her music, which she likes to call ethno-punk, is inspired by Bengali folk and European psychedelic and Krautrock music. 

‘Virasat’

Spic Macay is organising Virasat 2013, a concert by the Gundecha Brothers, at the Indian Institute of Science on November 25, 5.30 pm.


ART 

Wildlife illustrations

A solo show of nature and wildlife illustrations done by wildlife artist Saleem Hameed will be on display at Renaissance Gallerie, Cunningham Road till November 2.

‘3 View’

‘3 View’, an amalgamation of art works of three artists — Buwa Shete, Om Swami and Mohammad Osman — will be on display till November 15 (10 am to 6 pm) at Gallery-g, Lavelle Road.


Pot Pourri

‘The Only Real...

The screening of the documentary film ‘The Only Real Game’ will be held on November 7, 6 pm at the Bangalore International Centre, Teri Complex, 4th Main, 2nd Cross, Domlur 2nd Stage.

Fun galore

Comedian Russell Peters will perform as part of ‘The Russell Peters Notorious World Tour’ at the Koramangala Indoor Stadium on October 31 and November 1. Tickets for both shows will be available on www.nh7.in and www.bookmyshow.com  

Kannada classes

Kannada Prasaara Parishat, a non-profit organisation, is holding spoken Kannada classes and Kannada script read-write learning classes in separate batches. The classes will be held only on Sundays, from 10 am to 1 pm, on Hosmat Hospital premises, Magrath Road. Candidates will also be awarded certificates of merit. For details, call 9448878569.

‘Sangeet Sangam’ 

The release of ‘Sangeet Sangam – History of Hindustani Music in Dharwad’, authored by Ramachandra Sidenur, will be held at the Bangalore International Centre, Teri Complex, 4th Main, 2nd Cross, Domlur 2nd Stage on November 8, 6 pm. This will be followed by a flute recital by Pandit Pravin Godkhindi.  

Political cartoons

An exhibition of political cartoons, caricatures and illustrations by Suraj ‘Eskay’ Sriram will be held from November 9 to 23 at The Indian Institute of Cartoonists, Indian Cartoon Gallery, No. 1, Midford House, off MG Road, Trinity Circle.

‘Laughter Fusion’

PunchTantraa is presenting ‘Laughter Fusion’, a radical mime event at the MLR Convention Hall, Brigade Millennium Campus, 7th Phase, JP Nagar on November 2, 6.30 pm. For tickets, visit: www.punchtantraa.com/tickets

Old books

On November 1, 9 am to 4 pm, there will be a sale of old and discarded books and magazines, from 10.30 am to 4 pm, at The Indian Institute of World Culture, No. 6, BP Wadia Road, Basavanagudi. 

Handicrafts fair 

Srinidhi Arts and Crafts Organisation is holding a unique handicrafts’ fair enabling artisans to showcase not only their skills but also their products at Chitrakala Parishath, Kumarakrupa Road till November 2, between 10 am and 7 pm. 

The textile collection will include Chanderi fabrics and saris, Ilkal saris, kalamkari and Chettinad saris. The prominent items on display will be dhokra cast metal and iron items, terracotta, pottery, silver and metal jewellery, bamboo products are attractive. Apart from these, natural soaps, stationery items made out of hand, oil and several others are drawing the attention of visitors. 


You are holding an event and want the City to know about it? Send us the details of the programme, date and time, along with a photo to get it listed in our ‘In the City’ column. Our email id: metrolife@deccanherald.co.in