An increasing number of people are opting for international design styles, from the French and Italian, to English Tudor and African. Globalisation has truly broadened the horizons of design enthusiasts, discovers Swati Kapur.
ADVERTISEMENTI recently visited a friend whose house (read world) was artistically influenced by a whole lot of international art and decor. 

In awe, I simply took a tour of the house looking for hand-picked knick knacks from round the world and some great auction pieces and came to the conclusion that the more one travels, the more one gets influenced by sights, cultures and ways of living and that simply gets translated into our own way of living. 

Going Mediterranean

More and more people are adapting to an international contemporary way and style of living. The diverse travel and exposure to different cultures and living clearly reflects in their home decor as well. 

A swanky apartment in Gurgaon boasts of an open bright living room with milky white walls. The splash of colours that enlivens the room is the vibrant blue flower drape and a colourful sea blue and orange painting of a country side. “It’s a Mediterranean set-up,” says homeowner Nishi Kashyap, proudly. 

The rest of the rooms too are done in the same flavour – reflecting light and warmth. Even the flower arrangement and the balcony was done in the same spirit. 

White dominated the Kashyap household. And it followed them right into the kitchen.Doing a Mediterranean house is not difficult at all. It is all about openness, brightness and flow. 

Therefore, before implementing this style, it is essential that you find ways to eliminate, store and disguise clutter. This decor works best as an overall look, and not as accents. Keep in mind that this kind of a set-up reflects a whole culture and living, so, keep your colour palette simple. 

It is best not to include anything more than the sea, the earth and the blooming countryside.

On what influenced her to create a Mediterranean ambience, she quickly gets transported to her several trips to the Mediterranean region. 

“My husband’s work takes us a lot to the region and that’s where I picked up the love for pure whites and simple living decor,” she adds. So, if you’re seriously thinking of implementing some Mediterranean ideas in your home, listen to this piece of advice: “Not all whites are the same; there are different undertones. 

White has over 25 different shades including beige, cosmic latte, cream, pearl, vanilla, etc among others. White has the ability to evoke diverse moods and add charm and elegance in your home. If you are an avid collector of art pieces and want them to be effectively displayed, then only a white background will allow minute details to stand out.

 Grey whites usually make the room appear smaller so it is advisable to not use this shade in small rooms,” says Alok Goel, CEO, Nitco Tiles. 

Slice of Italy

The Italians have been famous for a whole movement in art and design from ancient times. The frescoes and life-like forms created during the Renaissance movement still influence design and decor trends internationally. One may have heard a lot about Italian marble, but it’s much more than that. 

Usher in a slice of Italy into your homes by introducing anything from rustic Tuscan to ultra modern Murano glass. Italian lighting styles are influenced by the Italian Renaissance as well as the Art Deco period. 

Murano glass creates a clean, modern feel to any design. It comes in a multitude of colours and varieties, and range from elaborate chandelier and ceiling fixtures to simple side table lamps and sleek accent lights. 

Made with traditional glass blowing methods, using glass and gold powder their making too is a feast for the eyes.

For a casual ambience to your home, add Tuscan-influenced lighting. With extensive use of wrought iron, Tuscan lighting fixtures add a rustic flair that works well with antiques, wood floors, terracotta tiles and colourful linens. 

Black wrought iron chandeliers create a stately focal point over a dining room table. Wrought iron sconces serve as subtle mood lighting along dark hallways or recessed corners. Gold Tuscan fixtures add a hint of shine to any casual design style.

English Tudor

The English Tudor style offers a sense of refinement and elegance. Pieces are well-made and integrate well with family heirlooms and antiques. The English Tudor look is ideal for the living room and areas for entertaining, but it can also extend to the rest of the home and even the garden. However, the art pieces and decor elements need to maintain the rich age -old charm which can sometimes be quite restricting to new purchases and ideas being integrated into the decor.
  Call of the wild…Africa

The warmth of earthy tones, the call of the wild and sunshine are all you have to keep in mind when doing up your home the African way. The best way to proceed is to start off with an off white, beige, sandstone or similar colour and use it as a canvas to display African accessories which in themselves can be very loud and captivating.

 African accessories as baskets, decorative picture frames, art, textiles, masks and sculptures can act as focal points as they are usually big and colourfully done. Drapes too could carry the theme with cultural figures, motifs, geometric patterns and wildlife prints.

French connection

The French style is a subtle and delicate one to implement. Intricate table linens to fine stationery, cutlery to stylish cotton throws can add a classic French look to your interiors. Also look out for highly sought-after antiques from the Provence region perhaps. 

The kitchen can house some sleek olive and dressing bottles and the windows garnished with small colourful pots with small flowers peeping out. “I picked up some amazing breakfast accessories like bread box, butter case, buns and bread plate and  look forward to the pleasure of having breakfast together with the French stuff all beautifully spread on the table,” says Gareema Rustagi from Mumbai. 

Well, you needn’t necessarily travel to distant places to collect the art pieces, drapes and furniture. 

You can very well source them in India as well. Stores like Ebony Gautier, d’mart Exclusif, Apartment 9 have work from celebrated artistes. D’mart Exclusif has works from Luciano Cazzola, a renowned Italian artist whose exclusive work is in porcelain and ceramics, is worth picking up. Divya Amit from Bangalore loves to pick up antiques and fine artefacts from just about anywhere she spots it. 

“Some of my choicest of artefacts have not been purchased from fine galleries or boutiques but quaint shops that often go unnoticed,” she says. 

Another Italian rendition is the silverware. The Italians who are fine silversmiths bring the influence of their art techniques to create beautiful objects d’art. Choose from available rich inlay work with enamel or with the intricate carving at d’mart Exclusive. 

Luxury furniture boutiques like the Elitaire also house pieces inspired by period Italian art and furniture.  

French brand Le Creuset at Bangalore stocks enameled cast iron, three-ply stainless steel and toughened non-stick pans along with stoneware patisserie and baking ranges, kitchen textiles and wine accessories.