The City witnessed patches of darkness for an hour on Saturday. Not because there was a power cut. It was a voluntary choice by people from various sections of the society.

In view of preserving and promoting a healthy planet, Wipro observed World Earth Hour by turning off their non-essential lights and conducting an interactive employee and customer engagement session. Lights were turned off across campuses globally, for a minimum of one hour between 8.30 pm and 9.30 pm.

Wipro also organised an online employee and customer engagement campaign, where the respondents had to answer various questions related to energy conservation. In addition to this, Wipro EcoEnergy had dimmed the website www.wiproecoenergy.com for the entire day. 

World Wildlife Fund (WWF)-India observed the seventh year of Earth Hour at Cornerstone Park, Indiranagar, Bengaluru, partnering with Cornerstone Properties Private Limited.

Like every year, this time, Earth Hour campaign saw celebrities from across the country endorsing the campaign. 

Apart from national brand ambassador actor Arjun Kapoor, tennis star Sania Mirza, southern actress Priyamani, Bengali actress June Maliah and Tamil actor Bharath, all voiced their association with the cause and invited citizens of their cities to participate in the initiative.

Priyamani said, “I am honoured to be a part of Earth Hour. WWF has taken an initiative at the global level that touches the lives of innumerable individuals and helps them understand the severe effects of climate change. The campaign is a voice for a sustainable future.”ADVERTISEMENTWWF-India launched ‘Sahasra Jyoti’ or ‘Beacon for the Sundarbans’ initiative during Earth Hour 2015, which aims at bringing sustainable development to the Sundarbans in India, by enabling energy access to 1,000 households in the region - all through solar energy. 

Informing about the significance of the Earth Hour,  Hari Somashekar, State Director, WWF, said, “Earth Hour brings together people across the globe to express concern over climate change.”

He said that this campaign provides a platform to create awareness on renewable energy among individuals, corporate entities and decision-makers to help mitigate the effects of climate change.

A yoga session, quiz on wildlife and environment and candlelight sessions were organised as part of Earth Hour.