Several parts of the State continued to receive rainfall on Wednesday. Most of the rivers are in spate while several roads continued to remain submerged affecting traffic movement. 

ADVERTISEMENTStanding crops on a vast tracts ofland havebeen washed away.

Shimoga

The district continued to receive heavy rain on  Wedneday. The district administration declared a holiday for schools and colleges on Wednesday.

Water level in the Linganamakki dam is increasing steadily as the catchment area is receiving a good rain. Authorities have already directed the people living in the areas close to the dam and River Sharavathi, to move to safer places. The inflow of water was 79,979 cusecs. 

A few villages in Sagar taluk, including Beesanagadde, were flooded as River Varada continued to flow above the danger mark. Movement of vehicles between Shimoga and Thirthahalli was suspended as the road near Mandagadde is submerged. 

A house collapse has been reported in Hosanagar taluk. ARivers Sharavathi, Varahi, Kumudwathi, Chakra and Savehaklu are flowing above danger mark, Hosanagar tahsildar has directed people residing on the banks of these rivers to move to safer places. The new bridge in Bhadravathi town continues to remain submerged as 50,000 cusecs of water was released from the Bhadra dam.

Yadgir

The outflow of water from the Basavasagara dam in Yadgir district reduced on Wednesday. A total of 1.08 lakh cusecs of water was flowing into the dam and 88,000 cusecs of water was being let into the river.

A total of 20 quintals of rice and kerosene has been supplied to the residents of Neelakantarayanagadde, which has turned into an island in Surpur taluk. Surpur tahsildar Arunkumar Kulkarni visited the place and supervised the distribution of foodgrains. Four quintals of rice was distributed in four trips in a mechanised boat to the ‘island.’

Dakshina Kannada

Intermittent rain continued to lash Dakshina Kannada district. The inflow into River Nethravathi and streams have increased and low-lying areas in Jeppinamogaru and Adamkudru are inundated.  

Holiday declared

Schools and colleges in Kukke Subrahmanya declared holiday after the Kumaradhara bridge, the link to the temple town, submerged. The snanaghatta is also flooded and shops in the vicinity are inundated.

With catchment area receiving good rainfall, the water-level in the river has increased. The river is overflowing on Subrahmanya-Panja Road at Bolmale. A slight rise in water-level will submerge the road. If this bridge is submerged, then the alternative road to Subrahmanya will also be affected. Owing to the closure of the bridge, devotees had to use the Subrahmanya-Panja Road. Vehicles to Mysore and Bangalore passed through Subrahmanya-Panja-Puttur and Subrahmanya-Sullia-Madikeri Roads.

Chikmagalur

Rajesh, 29, was washed away after he accidentally slipped into a water body at Kanchinahaklu in Chikmagalur district. With rain lashing the district, the rivers are in spate. The water-level in Tunga river has increased and has inundated Kurubagere Road connecting Sringeri. Heavy rain lashed Mudigere, Kalasa, Horanadu, Kottigehara, Koppa, Sringeri, Kerekatte, Kigga and N R Pura. Schools remained closed in Koppa, Sringeri and NR Pura taluks. 

Kodagu

The district administration declared a holiday for schools, colleges and anganwadi centres in Kodagu district. With heavy rain lashing in the Cauvery catchment area, water-level in the Triveni Sangama has increased drastically. The Bhagamandala-Ayyangeri Road remains inundated. An old bridge at Balamuri is submerged. River Lakshmanatheertha is in spate and three houses are damaged in Madikeri.

Belgaum

Heavy downpour in the forest areas of Khanapur taluk, Belgaum district, has submerged several low-lying bridges snapping road connectivity to many villages. Kankumbi, the birthplace of River Malaprabha, recorded 10 cm of rain on Wednesday.River Mahadayi is in spate following heavy rains in the Bhimgad Wildlife Sanctuary area. Deggaon, Mandil, Kelil, Krishnapur, Talewadi, Jamgaon, Gavaali and Kongla villages are cut off, with the Banduri canal overflowing.

A swollen Malaprabha has submerged a Maruthi temple at Habbanatti village. Chikla-Parwad, Chikla-Amgaon, Kalmani-Amate, Olmani-Uchwade, Modeppa-Thirthkunde and Hemmadga-Talewadi bridges are submerged. Vast tracts of farm land with standing paddy crops are inundated. 

Rains have receded in Maharashtra’s Konkan region and there had been no change in the quantum of discharge from the neighbouring state. The inflow into River Krishna and its tributaries from Maharashtra stood at 1,07,349 cusecs on Wednesday.

Uttara Kannada

The flood threat in River Varada in Sirsi taluk of Uttara Kannada district has increased.  The Gudnapur tank has breached leaving the Sirsi-Banawasi Road submerged. On Wednesday, Sirsi recorded 70.5 mm of rain and so far, the region has received 1,924 mm of rainfall.

Mohan Chowdhary, a 55-year-old daily wage employee of the Forest department was washed away in the floods, while he was crossing an inundated bridge over River Pandari at Chandwad village in Joida taluk of Karwar district on Wednesday. 

Heavy rain in the district is hindering the rescue team’s operations that is fishing for the body. River Aghanashini in Kumta taluk is also facing a flood threat.

Incessant rains continued to lash parts of Uttara Kannada district. Bhaktal, Honnvar, Kumta, Ankola, Siddapur, Mundagod, Joida and Yellapur have been receiving heavy showers. 

In the last 24 hours, district recorded an average rainfall of 69.3 mm. The authorities of Gerusoppa Hydel Project have issued warning to people living on the banks of River Sharavthi about release of water into the river from Linganamakki reservoir.

Hassan

As many as seven houses have collapsed across Arakalagudu taluk due to uninterrupted rains. Normal life has went out of gear and farming activities have been crippled due to the heavy downpour. Farmers face the threat of losing commercial crops such as ginger and tobacco.

Bagina to KRS

Chief Minister Siddaramaiah offered bagina to KRS reserviour in Mandya district. Speaking to reporters he said that a sum of Rs 1,800 crore had been earmarked for irrigation projects in Cauvery command area. He said that eight canals connected to KRS will be developed at a cost of Rs 400 crore.

Officials of Nugu reservoir in H D Kote taluk of Mysore district had issued an alert for villages in low-lying areas of the reservoir to be evacuated.  

According to press a release by executive engineer of the dam, water level at the dam was at 103 feet, seven feet less than its maximum capacity. 

With rainfall continuing in catchment areas, the reservoir might fill soon, following which water will be released. Villagers in low-lying areas must be evacuated to prevent any casualties, the press release said.