Thank God it’s Saturday!’ or TGiS, as it is known among its members, is an exclusive group of photographers, both experienced and amateur, who despite their varied professions get together every Saturday and Sunday to pursue their collective love for photography. 

ADVERTISEMENTTGiS was founded by Shankar Subramanian, independent photographer and Director, ‘Nine Dots Corporate Training Services’, and Anand Sharan, award-winning photographer and Director of ‘Bangalore School of Art and Photography’ (BSOAP) along with a few passionate photographers, for the purpose of providing a supportive and nurturing space for serious hobbyists who have passed out of BSOAP to practice their newly acquired skills. 

Areas of interest vary widely among the members from portraits, wildlife, bird photography, macro-photography, culture and performing arts. TGiS provides a creative space for amateurs to learn from senior hobbyists/professionals about the art of using the full potential of the camera.

In 2013, TGiS had its first photography exhibition, ‘Clicked2Help’, with a collection of 80 photographs. The group was able to raise an amount of Rs 2.3 lakh which went towards supporting the various projects of ‘Multiple Sclerosis Society’ of India, Bengaluru Chapter. 
Thus, the driving philosophy of ‘Clicked2Help’ was formed, using art to contribute meaningfully to society. 

The members have carried forth this ideal in the second edition of the exhibition centred on ‘The Spirit of India’. 

The collection of photographs showcases a wide repertoire of Indian motifs, ranging from culture and arts, wildlife and landscape. What makes these exhibitions so special is the display of amateur works of high standard, right alongside those of experienced and senior photographers, contributing to a liberating spirit of inclusion. 

The proceeds from last year’s ‘Clicked2Help’ exhibition went towards an eye hospital to be established in Devanahalli and other service projects of the Rotary RMV Club. 

‘Clicked2Help’ is supported by BSOAP, one of the City’s oldest photography schools, run by Anand Sharan, an art and commercial photographer with global acclaim. 

This year, the members of TGiS are again organising this exhibition at Karnataka Chitrakala Parishath – Spirit of India with a tapestry of colours and visuals from across the country, showcasing the immense natural wealth of our lovely nation. 

They aim to collect as much fund as possible to support patients affected with Multiple Sclerosis (MS). 

The entire proceeds from the sale of photographs will be donated to the welfare of patients affected with MS. The photographs will be exhibited at the Parishath from 10 am to 7 pm on March 28 and 29.