Kristu Jayanti College recently hosted a ‘Youth Week’, which featured events that were aimed at inspiring the young to be responsible towards society. There were several events such as mime, creative writing, painting competition, extempore and debate just to mention a few.  

ADVERTISEMENTThe occasion was also used to make students more aware on first-aid, women empowerment, wildlife conservation and road safety. The students were put through several training sessions. 

The first session on first-aid was by Paul Joshua, who demonstrated on how to give first-aid to a victim, anytime, anywhere. “It’s simple. Knowing how to give first-aid allows you to help someone who is injured or suddenly falls ill until help arrives. Keeping the victim alive and preventing the victim’s condition from getting worse is important,” said Ajith, a student of Kristu Jayanti. 

Another session on women empowerment by Franklin Joseph focussed on training women in certain Israelian military tactics to safeguard themselves in case of an emergency.

The training also had sessions on psychological training against crime and sexual abuse for women. “We were guided on how to act upon in an emergency situation and protect ourselves from threats using simple objects which we use in our day-to-day life. Women can encounter violence anytime,” said Rashmi, a student of commerce. 

Sharath Babu gave students an insight into the importance of protecting the endangered animal species and their habitats.

The students were also given an opportunity to teach jewellery designing to the students of Kothanur Government School. The schoolchildren were taught craft and how to create their own design for jewellery. This gave them a chance to exhibit their inherent skills and showcase their talents.  

The students interacted with a couple of organisations, involved in working with the youth to build a better nation. The students were told about their responsibilities towards the society. 

These interactive sessions inculcated a sense of conciousness in our minds about social responsibilities towards a larger society,” said Umesh, a student of computer science.