The public contact programme organised by the district administration opened a plethora of problems faced by the people of the region, at Kerekatte in Sringeri taluk on Wednesday.

ADVERTISEMENTThe villagers vent their anger at Wildlife division ACF R L Nayak. They said “though the government had released funds for providing drinking water, road and electricity connection to the dwellers of Kudremukh National Park, the forest department officials are coming in the way of development work. The officials have banned parking of vehicles in National Park limits. All the boards of hotels and business establishments have been removed. In the name of wildlife conservation, the officials had disconnected electricity connection to the region for one week.

We are treated like animals.” Submitting a petition, Beguru Taluk Panchayat Member Geetha Srinivas Naik said that there is a need to lay road at Doddinakoda, commencing the work on construction of a bridge and road at Adikesu Dharmappa, retaining wall for a bridge at Bhalekadi Kodige and also to provide electricity connections to Tharollikudige and Belagodu Kudige.

Diwakar, a resident, said, “We have been losing crops for wild animals menace. We were working in cooperation without fellow farmers. After evicting us from Uruni, we are finding it difficult to get labourers.” 

The villagers also urged the authorities to upgrade Ashrama school and also to widen roads in National Park limits.

Speaking on the occasion, Deputy Commissioner Shekarappa said that the solution to the problems in villages are in the hands of the villagers. The officials should listen to their woes. He said “permission should be given for laying pipelines for supplying water within the limits of law. Whether you (officials) could live without water, electricity and proper road?” he asked. 

MP Jayaprakash Hegde said, “we need to find solution to the problems by implementing Forest Rights Act effectively. The CM has directed to constitute Forest Committees. All the applications under Forest Rights Act that were rejected in the past should be reviewed once again.” 

When the DC sought clarification for not constituting forest committees, ITDP officer Lalitha Bai said that the committees will be constituted in Koppa and Sringeri taluks by the end of December. 

Taluk Panchayat Member Arun Kumar said that those who voluntarily come out of the forest and accept rehabilitation package should be given minimum compensation of Rs 20 lakh. The property should be valued as per the 2013 valuation. 

District-in-Charge Minister Abhaychandra Jain, ZP CEO Vittal and others were present.