Speaking on “Wildlife conservation and welfare of aboriginal tribal” in a programme organised jointly by Karnataka Forest Department and Western Ghats Task Force here at Ananthapadbhanabha Hall on Tuesday, he said the programme is initiated by Central Forest Department and will be implemented in 2011. The programme is coming out with elaborate plans extended towards next 10 years. As many as 20 million hectares plantations will be the target by the end of 2021 covering areas across the country. 

Besides plantations, forest and wildlife conservation will be taken at the grass root level. 
Gram Panchayaths and Gram Sabhas will be actively involved in the process of executing the programmes concerned with the project. Each work will be taken up through Gram Panchayats. In the course of the programme, the lapsed Eco Development Committees will be rejuvenated, he added.

Public hearing programme of southern states will be held on July 5 at Mysore under the direction of Union Minister Jayaram Ramesh. Until now about 9 public hearings are held in different places in the country. Attempts are on to augment the compensation amount for the victims and proposal urging the same is being sent to Ministry. Henceforth, the victim of wild animals attack will receive Rs 2 to 2.5 lakh instead of Rs 1.5 lakh received at present. Humanitarian concerns accompanied with timely expenses and immediate disposal of the compensation is the need of hour. Inadequate and delayed compensation makes no sense, he added.

Speaking after inaugurating the programme, Western Ghats Task Force President Ananth Hegde Ashisara said rehabilitation and compensation process is given utmost concern. Special packages will be made available for the people residing in reserve forest areas. 
Measures will be taken to facilitate forest tribal people with the information regarding the welfare measures taken up by the government. There are as many as 4.8 thousand Eco Development Committees in the State. The programme was for 5 years that was initiated in the year 2004. Measures will be taken to rejuvenate the Committees. Public 
involvement is indeed necessary for the conservation of forests and wildlife. Sustainable development is very much needed, he added.

As many as Rs 2.5 crore is allotted for the development and basic infrastructural facilities to the tribal forest aboriginals in the district. Measures are taken for the all round development of these people, said Udupi ZP CEO N Rajashekar.
ADVERTISEMENT