During the question hour in the Legislative Council on Tuesday, JD(S) member Patel Shivaram raised the issue, 
stating that farmers were seriously affected due to frequent jumbo raids. 

To his question about the measures taken by the State to mitigate the man-elephant conflict, Forest and Environment Minister C P Yogeeshwara said that various measures had been taken by the forest department, including digging of elephant trenches and installation of solar-powered fencing. 

Shivaram stressed that the measures were not adequate to address the problem and said that over a hundred elephants in the region had made the lives of the people miserable.

Duties not discharged

He said that despite the forest minister’s interaction with the local MLAs, the department had not discharged its duties effectively.  

Leader of the Opposition Motamma, JD(S) member M C Nanaiah and others said that the conflict had become perennial, and that the government should put in place a concrete programme to mitigate the problem.

Yogeeshwara said that the translocation of elephants was the only remedy. He, however, said that the exercise had been stalled as the High Court had refused to permit the shifting of the elephants. 

He said that a meeting would be held on December 15 to discuss the problem, and efforts would be made to convince the Court. 

He said that as per the Court directions, the officials had visited Kenya to study the translocation methods adopted there, and that country’s expertise would be sought to tide over the problem.

Monkey menace

To tackle monkey menace in Koppal district and to keep their population under control, the State government will take up a sterilisation programme.

Replying to a question by BJP member Achar Halappa on the menace of black bucks and monkeys in the district, Yogeeshwara said that monkeys had been translocated to nearby forests on an experimental basis. But, the exercise was not successful as the animals returned, he said. 

When the Opposition members, including Congress MLC Veeranna Mathikatti, demanded that there should be a permanent solution to the problem, the Minister said that the department had decided to sterilise the monkeys to prevent their breeding.

He maintained that the black bucks were sensitive creatures and that they could not be translocated.ADVERTISEMENT