Miffed with the ban on animal dissection, the Delhi University has urged the UGC and Environment Ministry to reconsider the decision, saying it is reducing zoology into a “dead discipline”.

ADVERTISEMENT“We have written to the UGC requesting it to reconsider the decision and limit the ban to just endangered animals. Zoology is being reduced into a ‘dead discipline’ because of the ban where in students are just reading theory and are unable to do any practical experiments,” Neeta Sehgal, Head of DU’s Zoology Department has said in a letter.

In 2011, the University Grants Commission had imposed a partial ban on animal dissection and directed all universities and colleges to stop experimentation on animals for training purposes for Zoology and Life Sciences at the undergraduate level.

However, last year, the UGC had instructed all universities to ban dissection of animals for academic purposes at both the undergraduate and postgraduate levels.“No animal from any species shall be dissected, either by teachers or students for any purpose,” the UGC notification had said.

“It is ironical that we can kill a cockroach using a repellant at home but cannot pin the same in a laboratory to understand its anatomy. Concerning the maintenance of ecology, we have also raised the same with the Ministry of Environment and Forests to revoke the ban,” Sehgal said.

“And dissection doesn’t mean we simply cut an animal into two halves and study it. It is a dirty word to be used. There is a difference between post-mortem and a surgery too,” she added.

The UGC had said non-animal methods, including computer simulations, interactive CD-ROMs, films and lifelike models, can be used to teach anatomy and complex biological processes, which are better than cruel, archaic animal laboratories processes. Educational institutions found violating the order can now be booked under the Wildlife Protection Act and also the Prevention of Cruelty Against Animals Act, the UGC had said.

“You cannot teach anatomy by doing simulations merely on computers. It is like playing games for students; they do not get any in-depth knowledge. They do not know what will be the odour when you dissect an animal, how are you supposed to deal with it medically and continue with the process. Without practical training tomorrow if they perform some surgery, they might be shaky and inexperienced,” she said.