Raitha Hitharakshana Vedike has opposed the environment ministry’s notification which earmarks Pushpagiri Wildlife Sanctuary, covering 199.37 square kilometres in Western Ghats, as an eco-sensitive zone.

Vedike president Hamid Idnuru told reporters at Patrika Bhavan here on Thursday that the ministry has issued a notification in the Gazette of India, dated June 28, in this regard. The wildlife sanctuary covers parts of Dakshina Kannada, Hassan and Kodagu districts. 

The villages falling within the eco-sensitive zone around Pushpagiri Wildlife Sanctuary are Kalmakar in Sullia taluk, Dakshina Kannada, Kumaralli and forest, Kothanalli, Surlabi, Hammiyala, Kaloor, Galibeedu and forest in Kodagu. The total area is 3,288.67 sqkm.

Notified areas

The notified reserve forest areas within the eco-sensitive zone around Pushpagiri Wildlife Sanctuary are Bisile state forest in Hassan district, Subrahmanya RF, Kiribag RF and Nalkur RF in Dakshina Kannada district and Kadamakal RF in Kodagu district. The total area is 166.49 sqkm, he said. 

According to the notification, forests, horticulture areas, agricultural areas, parks and open spaces earmarked for recreational purposes in the eco-sensitive zone shall not be used or converted into areas for commercial or industrial activities, Hamid said and added that this condition will result in the evacuation of local tribal people and the agricultural community. They will not be able to lead their lives in the earmarked area, he said. 

Former zilla panchayat member Bharat Mundodi said that the people currently living in the zone are not destroying the forest. Farmers do not disturb wildlife and forests.

Memo submitted

“The notification is a move to evacuate the people in the region.  A memorandum has been submitted to the committee to be forwarded to the deputy commissioner to not acquire the earmarked regions. If the notification is implemented, the Vedike will conduct severe protests,” he warned.

Advocate Pradeep Kumar and farmer leader Vasanth Kiribag were present during the press meet.
ADVERTISEMENT