"The original conceptual framework of the Taj Mahal considered Yamuna as an integral part and not as a separate entity. Water of the river should flow touching the rear foundation of the monument to keep the structure in good health," said Mughal historian R. Nath.  

The river has bridged the gap between the foundation of the Taj and the main stream which had been distanced by an artificial park.
Heritage lover Sudhir Gupta said: "If the emperor had been alive and looking at the Taj from his confines in the fort he would have been mighty pleased, for that is how he had wanted it to look."

Early Wednesday, the water level in the Yamuna crossed 495 feet, submerging large parts of the controversial Taj Corridor project.
Concern had been expressed in some quarters about how the rising Yamuna level was posing a threat to the Taj Mahal.
However, Indudhar Dwivedi of the Archaeological Survey of India said: "There is no threat to the Taj from the Yamuna water. It was for Yamuna water that the Taj was built."

"The grandeur of the Taj looks grander when the river is full of water, when the sky is clear and blue with the moon and stars smiling at night. The romantic aura is automatically kindled and finds expression in myriad ways," said noted theatre personality Jeetendra Raghuvanshi.

Not just Taj Mahal, other monuments like the Agra Fort, Etmaduddaula, Chini ka Roza and Mehtab Bagh along the banks of the river are drawing huge crowds as well.
"The buildings look dazzling, rain washed. The view of the city from the other side is simply amazing," said wildlife photographer Lalit Rajora. 

While most people are happy with the state of the river, those living in low-lying areas are naturally alarmed and praying for an early relief. 
Flood water entered more areas in the city after the river touched 497 feet Wednesday afternoon. 

"The worst is yet to come. The water level is feared to go up to 500 feet by Thursday afternoon," says Bharatiya Janata Party corporator Deepak Khare.
In Mathura and Vrindavan, the low-lying areas have been cut off from the main road. Water has now spread into fields along the bank, causing extensive damage to crops.ADVERTISEMENT