Remember the times when camping used to be an adventurous activity and most people wanted to go for it just for the experience? However, with the busy lives that we lead nowadays, that kind of an expedition feels like a far-fetched dream. 

However, one of the most popular travel trends this year is breaking all the barriers and reviving people’s bond with nature. ‘Glamping’ or glamorous camping, as it is known, is giving experiential travel a new meaning. Here, one has all the necessary facilities and amenities like bed, bathroom, kitchen, dining room and living room with ample space to move around.
 The idea is to provide the same luxury and comfort as that of a resort while being amidst nature. 

Ashish Parmar, a photographer, says, “I recently went glamping in Africa. People have become used to staying in a regular hotel or a resort and that becomes boring. The advantage of glamping is that one can enjoy the same facilities — from charging points to electricity — while being a part of nature, except that the concrete walls are replaced by canvas walls. It’s a new, exciting trend.”

 So is it all affordable? “With my experience of glamping in Africa and Kabini, I have observed that the cost is at par with that of a luxurious resort. That apart, glamping is extremely safe. There are times when one can encounter bugs and insects so it is important to come with an open mind. Getting a glimpse of the wildlife is a beauty in itself,” explains Ashish. 

For Anirban Dutta and his wife Roshu, adventure and travel have been a big part of their life. Needless to say, the couple have given a shot at glamping as well. Impressed by the experience, Anirban says that it provides the solace of a vacation in offbeat places. 

“‘Himalayan Glamping Retreat’ provided us with the same comfort that we would expect in a five-star hotel. The spectacular views from our tents added to our experience. Most glamping retreats practice eco-tourism and often encourage their guests to follow certain steps to reduce the carbon footprint,” says Anirban. 

Pradeep Gowriraju, the founder of ‘Happyretreats’, says that glamping is catching on as a trend in the travel industry. “People’s take on how they want to experience hospitality has changed over the years. I have started the concept of ‘popup’ hotels and we provide individuals with experiential getaways. This trend, similar to glamping, is going to stay and overtake the camping experience. The only occasional hiccup is in the logistics part,” he says. 
Pradeep also points out that glamping is becoming popular not just as a camping experience but also for destination weddings. 

Agreeing that this trend is more popular with honeymoon travellers is Mukesh Thapa,  Business Strategist of ‘TravelTriangle’. He says that glamping is garnering a lot of attention in India. He observes that people in the age group of 25 to 45 years form the chunk of luxury campers who want to try something more relaxing without really having to exert themselves physically. 

“Along with honeymoon travellers, much of the corporate crowd is also opting for glamping. These are people who would like to experience attractions like camel rides, safaris, river crossing, hiking and trekking. Places like Goa, Jaisalmer, Udaipur, Wayanad and Nagaland top the list when it comes to this interesting activity,” he says. 
ADVERTISEMENT