On the one hand, greens have been demanding to explore alternative routes to lay 400 kv high tension line between Mysore-Kozhikode, and on the other hand, Power Grid Corporation of India (PGCI) says that the alternative routes were discussed way back in 2009 and they were rejected. 

The Members of Kaveri Sene, Coorg Wildlife Society and Kaveri Bachao Andolan have said that felling of trees will have its impact on the bio-diversity and environment of the region. Hence, the project should be kept out of the purview of the Kodagu district. 

Power Grid Corporation Chief Manager C D Kishor told Deccan Herald that all the three suggestions put forth by the protesters were discussed and rejected. 

The route proposed by the protesters are as follows:

Route 1—Upgrading 220 kv line that provided connectivity between Karnataka and Kerala. Upgrading of the line falls under Bandipura National Park. 

After the implementation of Forest Conservation Act 1980, no development work can be initiated inside National Park where tigers habitate.

Hence, the proposal was rejected. 

Route 2—Laying electric wire on D-line of Nagarahole National Park. ADVERTISEMENTHowever, the route was rejected as the width of the D-line is only 15 metre. The width required for laying high-tension wire is 45 metres. 

Hence, it would require felling of trees on minimum of 30 meter after the D-line. On an average about 17,515 trees would have been felled if the route was approved. Hence, both the State and Central governments had rejected the suggestion. 
Route3—Underground cable. 

The proposal was rejected as it was an uphill task to lay underground cable for 55 kms. To lay underground cable, a separate road will have to constructed to take up repair work in the underground cable.

Present route

At present, the high-tension line will pass through Hunsur, Piriyapattana-Devamacchi forest-Maldare-Hundi-Mayamudi-Bekkesodlur-Nalkeri-Kutta-Kerala. 

Delay in work

The length of Mysore-Kozhikode line is 210 kms. The line will pass through 92 kms in Kerala. 

The work in Kerala and Mysore has been completed. Owing to the protest by environmentalists, the work was stalled in Kodagu district.  

Technical committee

Following the protest, the State government has constituted a technical committee to explore the possible alternative routes. 

The committee has been directed to submit report within 15 days. 

Kaveri Bachao Andolan Convenor B C Nanjappa said “our concern is environment of the district. We had suggested three alternative routes. If it was not acceptable, then let the technical committee constituted by the government explore an alternative.”