In an effort to encourage tourist movement from India to Sri Lanka, the Sri Lanka Tourism Promotion Bureau recently organised a get-together at Vivanta by Taj, MG Road.

 For the attendees, the evening presented a wonderful opportunity — a chance to get a glimpse of another culture and way of life. In fact, the entire occasion was steeped in the flavour of the island-country, with traditional music, dances and an innovative fashion show.

The evening began with a display of traditional Sri Lankan songs and dances, with which the dignitaries were welcomed. To the audience’s delight, noted cricket players Arjuna Ranatunga and Sanath Jayasuriya also attended the programme. Artistes dressed in white and orange with elaborate headgear entered the venue, beating drums, blowing conches and dancing. 

Prasad Kariyawasam, the Sri Lanka high commissioner to India, greeted the attendees in a variety of languages, before going on to explain the purpose of the evening. “Sri Lanka is known for cricket but today, we’re going to show you what else we have to offer. Tourism is booming and we want to promote this in India,” he explains. This initiative will take place in several Indian cities, but Bangalore was the first. 

“We chose to do this because firstly, we think Bengaluru is the growth centre that drives the Indian engine. And secondly, we feel close to Bengaluru — there is a sense of affinity with the people here,” he adds.

The fashion show that followed included collections that were heavily inspired by the culture of Sri Lanka. The textiles were manufactured by artisan communities from the island-country, and the designs were inspired by its lush landscapes, culture and smiling people. ADVERTISEMENTIn the first segment, the models sported chic black dresses in simple cuts and structured silhouettes with metallic accessories, including belts and pendants. In the second, the audience was offered a peep at the wildlife of the island; the designs were extravagant, with animal print. There were long, flowing gowns as well as saris in bold colours like turquoise  and navy blue. The third segment was slightly more contemporary — the models sported wrap dresses, fitted coats, chic hats and scarves.

The fourth segment was vivid and colourful, in bright colours like yellow, orange, bubblegum pink and sky blue. The models wore complicated up-dos, adorned with metallic butterflies. This was followed by a segment which sought to portray the beauty of the island’s beaches — the collection was a study in blue and gray, and the models wore large straw hats with chiffon scarves.

The next few segments also comprised mainly of beach wear — there were short, fitted dresses in multi-coloured checks as well as toga-esque drapes with bold stripes and tube tops, accessorised with colourful bangles, beaded necklaces and hats. Another segment sought to showcase the spa culture of Sri Lanka, with the models dressed in robes, loose trousers and striped shirts. The collection inspired by meditation was a study in white and comprised of flowing gowns and even a modified sari, which had touches of pale grey.