The Supreme Court on Monday refused to stay the notifications issued by the Centre for culling of Nilgais, monkeys and wild boars after declaring them vermin. The court, however, said these animals could be killed only when they ventured into a human habitat outside the forest area.

ADVERTISEMENTA bench of Justices Adarsh Kumar Goel and A M Khanwilkar asked the Animal Welfare Board of India (AWBI) and animal rights activists Gauri Maulekhi to make a representation with the Union government before challenging the order in court.
The petitioners challenged the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change’s decision declaring three animals as vermins for one year in the states of Bihar, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand. They claimed the notifications were in violation of the Constitution and the provisions of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act.
 
The petitioner contended that Section 62 of the Wildlife Protection Act, which allowed the Centre to issue the notification, declaring an animal as vermin, was excessive, arbitrary and unfettered.

Appearing for the Centre, Solicitor General Ranjit Kumar pointed out the petitioners have not challenged these notifications before the government. He also submitted that these petitions were not maintainable.

The court, which asked the government to respond to representations within two weeks, also asked if these notifications specifically talked about forest areas.
"Prohibition (on killing) will apply to forest area or animal habitat and not outside that. Absolute prohibition applies to animal habitat only. You cannot hunt them in their home. Suppose they are found outside their habitat, then how to deal with it,” the bench asked.

Representing the AWBI, the statutory body, senior advocate Sidharth Luthra contended that the government has arbitrarily issued the notifications without any basis or scientific study.

Citing the videos, showing shooting of animals, the counsel contended that there has to be compassion for animals. “There are scientific ways to deal with such situations. Wild animals cannot be killed like this,” he submitted.

Senior advocate Anand Grover, appearing for the animal rights activists, claimed that the Centre issued notifications without seeking report from the state governments.

The court, while refusing to issue any notice on the petitions, put the matter for further consideration on July 15.