A simple clarification sought by the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change from the Karnataka Forest Department over declaring a one-kilometre area around the Bannerghatta National Park (BNP) an eco-sensitive zone (ESZ) has exposed a needless tussle among senior forest officials, thereby delaying the process considerably.

Meanwhile, the agitated ministry has decided to go ahead with its decision on declaring the ESZ and not depend on the Forest Department or the appointed Cabinet sub-committee for clarification. The ministry will instead take the feedback from citizens.

"We sought clarity before going ahead with the ESZ clarification. But the feedback from people was shocking. Forest Department officials are busy with their own superiority issues and the department's clarifications don't help much. So, we have decided to depend on our own on-the-ground reports," an official in the ministry said.

The draft on the ESZ was prepared on June 15, 2016. The ministry sought the opinion of the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) and the Chief Wildlife Warden (CWW) in August 2017.

"We have learnt about the tussle between the head of forest force and the head of wildlife. The two officials are trying to show their superiority. As a result, we have not got the ground report from the deputy conservator of forests (BNP)," the official said. 

The PCCF-WL had sought the opinion of DCF (BNP). The CWW replied there is no need as the Cabinet sub-committee has already identified the safe zone around the BNP and that the additional chief secretary has already looked into the matter. "This ongoing tussle will only prolong the decision of declaring the ESZ," the official in the ministry pointed.

Earlier, the ministry received representations from the public against removing the watershed areas of Arkavathy River, Suvarnamukhi, Muthyalamadavu, Rayathmala Hole, Hebbalahalli and Anthargange, the areas which join the Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary (CWS).

People also suggested that the elephant corridor connecting the BNP to Tamil Nadu and the CWS should not be included in the ESZ. Kaushalendra Kumar, a member of the Lok Sabha from Bihar, in a letter to the ministry in August pointed that while survey number 56 in Doddaguli village, Kanakapura taluk, has been declared an ESZ, adjoining survey numbers (55 of Arkere and 57 of Halasuru village, both in Kanakapura) have been demarcated non-ESZ. Similarly, survey numbers 66 and 68 in the CWS boundary have been excluded.ADVERTISEMENT