The social media helps stars promote their films months before the release. Rakshit Shetty is  the latest star to join the bandwagon and the trailer of his project ‘Ricky’ has been viewed by 1.5 lakh people in the last few days! Speaking about the film and his upcoming projects, Rakshit humbly says that he owes his success and career to social media.

“I owe my career to social media. I got my first break, when I contacted someone on Orkut a few years back. Many of my films were promoted widely on social media, and I’m glad to say that this time too, I’m part of such a success story. The hype that the trailer of ‘Ricky’ has created over the past few days — one lakh viewers in just three days  — talks for itself,” says the actor. 

The movie will hit the big screens in early November and Rakshit is visibly excited. “The connection between actors and public increases a lot through social media, which is a big blessing.”

Speaking about the plot of the movie, he says,“The movie is a romantic one and I play the character is of a wildlife documentarian, who is in love. The movie’s second half has a twist, where he goes in search for the love of his life.” 

‘Ricky’, which was shot in a forest area in Udupi, was an experience in itself, says the actor who shot to fame with ‘Simple Agi Ondhu Love Story’. “The forest was a different experience altogether. After a day’s shoot, I would often find leeches on my feet and clothes. This was something new.” 

Rakshit adds that in movies, “different scenes that might belong to different parts of the plot are shot the same day, and it is a challenge to act these scenes out”. 

The young actor vouches that doing “one movie at a time” is his success mantra. “I like being in the character for a good amount of time when I’m shooting. Juggling different roles means not being able to immerse into the character fully and though I’ve had to do it sometimes, I prefer working on one project at a time.” 

He says that “each character has its own body language and a way of talking”, which gets better when a certain time is given to it. 

Rakshit, who just finished with the shooting of ‘Godhi Banna Sadharna Mykattu’, says that the movie is about a father and son. 

“The father goes missing and the film is named after the man who has ‘a wheatish complexion and an average built’. It is about the journey of finding him and the emotional connect that it involves.” 

When he isn’t shooting, Rakshit likes reading or writing. “I’m a lazy writer. I’m working on the script of my upcoming film ‘Thugs of Malgudi’, the shooting of which will start soon,” he says with a smile.