JSS Mahavidyapeeta has organised several programmes as part of Sri Shivarathreeshwara Shivayogi jatra mahotsava to be held between February 6 and 10. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe events of the Jatra will begin with the inauguration of indigenous games, cricket competition and boating

As part of the festival an educational and Science expo has been organised for the benefit of the students.  More than 200 models related to language, mathematics, science, social science and others would be displayed to help primary and high school students.

Free mass marriage

The Suttur festival committee has organised a free mass marriage as part of the celebrations to be held on February 7.  

The brides will be presented saree, blouse, toe rings and mangalsutra. The bridegroom will get dhothi, towel and shirt. There is no caste and religious bar. Food and accommodation facilities would be provided for those accompanying the couple, the release said.

Awareness programme

With thousands of people expected to attend the six-day festival, the committee has come out with a unique programme to create awareness on the ill-effects of being addicted to liquor, gutka and others. 

Debates and interaction on the topic will be held along with people sharing their experiences on how to quit the habits. Expert counsellors would impart valuable suggestions on the occasion.

Drawing contest

A state-level drawing competition will be held for school students and lamp decorating contest for women on February 10.

Drawing contest will be held in four categories. For students studying 1st and 2nd standard it is an open contest and the topic is nature and wildlife for 3rd and 4th std. 

While it is rural occupation for 5th to 7th std the topic is environment and cleanliness for students studying from 8th std to10th std.

Students and women from any part of the state may participate in the competition. Those coming from other places would be provided food and accommodation. 

Apart from drawing sheets all the other materials have to be brought by the contestants.
Women interested to take part in lamp decoration contest should bring all the necessary materials. Winners will be presented cash prize and attractive prizes. Interested may contact D Kuberappa on 94802 81097.

No flex boards

The festival committee has banned erecting flexboards that has photographs of individuals with wishes in and around the Srikshetra. Public are requested to cooperate.