The bird flu outbreak has prompted authorities at the Bannerghatta Biological Park to stop feeding chicken and eggs to the wild animals. ADVERTISEMENTPark authorities have also put in place safety measures for staff and visitors. BBP Executive Director R Gokul said the ban on feeding chicken, chick and eggs would continue until the current outbreak subsides. "We'd instead substitute chicken with beef and fish,"he added.Authorities, however, are afraid that a seven-year-old male Common Langur in the park may go hungry since it has always been fed boiled eggs. They are desperately searching for a food substitute for the animal. "This (unnamed male Langur) relishes the boiled egg. I'm surprised and equally worried. This, however, is not entirely rare," Gokul said.Though park authorities keep vegetables and fruits in its enclosure, the Langur waits for the boiled egg to appear on its plate every day. The animal has developed a taste for the egg in the last one year, a caretaker said.To feed the wildlife here, authorities buy 15 kilograms of chicken, 36 Kg fish, 374 chicks and 700 Kg of beef. The animals are not fed pork since the higher bacterial content would harm the health of the carnivorous beasts. They are fed six days a week and are allowed to diet on Tuesday.Among the 1,983 beasts in the park, three are common male Langurs (Hanuman Langur), four are Spectacled Langurs (Dusky leaf monkey) and 369 are avian population.The staff are constantly watching the birds. Should one of them die, they would isolate them and hold a post-mortem. They will also watch for any symptoms of H5N1 virus. Gokul said the staff are also monitored for possible infection.Park authorities have decided against closing down the zoo and have asked visitors to watch the birds from a distance and report if they find any of them dull, ailing or dead.They have kept trays filled with potassium permanganate at the entrance for visitors to dip their feet before entering the park. Vehicles coming to the park are also closely monitored. Park officials have asked visitors not to bring chicken or eggs for the time being.
They buy 15 Kg chicken, 36 Kg fish, 374 chicks and 700 Kg beef to feed the wild animals  They are concerned about one Male Common Langur that prefers to eat boiled eggsPark staff constantly watch birds to detect any sickness early