Speaking at one-day workshop on ‘Malekudias in transition: A survey cum study on what needs to be done’ by the Socio Cultural Research and Study Centre of Canara First Grade College here on Saturday, he said the administration is planning to give compensation to those forest dwellers who do not possess ‘patta,’ just like the way it is being given under Tiger Project. 

“There is no compulsion on the Malekudiyas to come out of the forest. However, no infrastructure facilities can be provided to those who remain inside the forest under the existing circumstances,” he added. 

MP Nalin Kumar Kateel said “Malekudiyas are the original inhabitants of Dakshina Kannada. In fact, if the forest is preserved in Dakshina Kannada, the credit should go to the Malekudiyas. If the basic infrastructures are provided within the forest, then it will affect the wild animals. Let us urge the Union Government to earmark land in all the gram panchayats to Malekudiyas.” 

Kudremukh Wildlife Foundation Coordinator Niren Jain said rehabilitation is a continous process. 

To resolve conflict with the wild animals, many have come out of the forest. Some families are so desperate that they have come out of the forest without taking compensation. 

Study

As many as 13 students of Canara College had visited Neriya, Kuthlur, Naydaguri, Panchala, Kolodi, Sullia taluk to make a study on the condition of Malekudiyas. 

To improve their condition, the students feel that there is a need to create an awareness on their right by strengthening them. If the Malekudiyas remain inside the forest, then their lifestyle should not effect the wild animals. Those families who fail to relocate should be provided with better facilities like ensuring quick evacuation and medical assistance for sick. The sole right of collecting and supplying non timber forest produce should be vested with Malekudiyas. The compensation should not be limited to Rs 10 lakh. Their custom and traditions should be documented before it merges with the practices of mainstream. SCRC Convenor Prameela gave introductory remarks. Principal Prof G N Bhat also spoke.ADVERTISEMENT