As their guest for the weekend, I am to adhere to the house rules strictly: electricity is limited to a couple of hours, only torches to guide through the night, resources are precious, forget about TVs, laptops, and even the noisy phones. Folks out here are sensitive, and all these could jar their nerves, prompting unpredictable reactions from them.

ADVERTISEMENTThis fuels the curiosity of the little enthusiast in me as I head in all eagerness towards their home – the dense jungle! Yes, I am a guest at the pristine climes of an eco-friendly wilderness camp located in the BR Hills Wildlife Sanctuary area. 

Our car motors slowly in the forest area, and comes to a sudden halt, beholding the scene in front: A young leopard majestically crossing the path!  Its cursory glance at us before vanishing into the foliage sends a myriad of messages: is it a welcome or a warning? Being intruders into their territory, is he the resident sentinel, assigned to keep a watch on us?
During the course of the day and the safari, the guide’s expertise enlightens me with more details of the role of each animal in keeping the balance of nature for mutual survival. As nightfall approaches, the day animals take a respite, handing over the shift to the night patrol. Spiders crawl out; a big snail, at his own pace, has converted the sink into its jogging track. We acknowledge each other respectfully.

Few lanterns light the pathway, but of course, I am in the wonderful company of the winking glow worms to regale me all along. I tread carefully, lest I inadvertently startle an innocent creature on its nocturnal shift. Every single life, small or big, is part of the guard – surviving and helping survive.

Getting lost in the moment is just a regular feature in the forest. I realise, much to my delight, I hardly miss the ring of my phone as I am privy to a countless sweet tones – all at no cost!

At 10 pm, the lights go out plunging my tent into total darkness. Not wanting to reach out to the torch, it takes a while for my city-bred eyes to adjust its faculties. And then, as is customary, without a notice it begins to pour.

I am awash with a strange silence within me as I ponder in awe about all those animals out there who are braving such nights without disturbing the surroundings. Perhaps, the elephant stands stoically protecting its young ones from the lashing rain. Could the leopard drag its kill up the tree to save the meal? Maybe, the tiger took refuge in a den. 

It is the silence of survival; and the silence of respectful understanding. While the animals are quietly respecting their pact with nature, man – the acting general – in all his greediness is turning traitor, destructing, damaging and threatening the survival of his troops.

The morning dawns bright as I head back to my concrete jungle – wiser and duty bound. The message is loud and clear: sync with nature. There are miles to go, measures to take to erase the harsh footprints left in the daily grind. I have a part to play in this network of survival. I am a sentinel too.