The International children’s film festival in Mangaluru and Udupi will screen 250 films in the competitive section, said Karnataka Chalanachitra Academy President Rajendra Singh Babu.

ADVERTISEMENTIn addition, 35 films from the non-competitive section will be screened during the festival, which will go on from November 22 till 26, said the president.

Speaking to mediapersons on Wednesday, Babu said that the last nine international children’s film festivals were held in Bengaluru.

“For the first time, the Academy is joining hands with Children’s India in organising the festival. Chief Minister Siddaramaiah will inaugurate the festival at Panambur beach in Mangaluru on Sunday, November 22. The State government has been supporting children’s films, and provides a subsidy of Rs 25 lakh a year to four children’s films,” he explained.

He said that 40 countries – US, Brazil, Taiwan, Netherlands, Canada, Hungary, UK, Germany, Czech Republic, Spain, Argentina, Maldova, Philippines, Croatia, Hong Kong, Italy, Portugal, France, Denmark, Norway, Russia, Mexico, Sweden, Australia, Iran, Bangladesh, South Korea, Indonesia, Belgium, Estonia, Tunisia, Haiti, South Africa, Venezuela, Latvia, Macedonia, Paraguay, Poland, and Romania – will be participating in the film festival.

All the films will have English sub-titles.District In-charge Minister B Ramanath Rai said that the valedictory function for the children’s film festival will be held at Malpe beach.

Deputy Commissioner A B Ibrahim said that the movies will be screened in nine theatres, three multiplexes in Mangaluru and five theatres in five taluks. The movies will be screened from 9.30 am to 4.30 pm. At a time, 7,500 students can watch the movies in all the theatres of the district. At least 1.20 lakh students will watch the movies in the four day festival, he informed.

Children’s India children’s film festival director N R Nanjunde Gowda said that along with the screening of the movies, workshops and seminars related to the film festival will be held at Pilikula Nisargadhama. For the first time, environmental and wildlife film panorama will be held. Environmental films will be screened along with the seminars related to the subject will be held, he added.