Many describe environment campaigns as a ‘losing battle’. But not all efforts are so. This is evident when we see an initiative in Tumakuru that has succeeded in taking many campaigns to a conclusive stage, greatly benefitting the environment. Take the instance of the campaign to preserve Thimlapura Forest, a forest range spread across Madhugiri and Koratagere taluks of the district. As a result of constant efforts, Thimlapura Forest got the status of a wildlife sanctuary in August 2016, the first one in the district to get the status. This campaign was led by Wildlife Aware Nature Club (WANC), a voluntary organisation based in Tumakuru. “It took 20 years of persistent efforts to elevate Thimmalapura forest from the status of a reserve forest to that of a wildlife sanctuary,” reveals TVN Murthy, the organisation’s founder. 

The organisation was founded in 1990 with four enthusiasts as members. The primary objective was to create awareness among the public about environment and wildlife. “We always ensured that the public, researchers and government are in the loop to make the effort effective and sustainable,” says Murthy, who is also the district’s honorary wildlife warden. The organisation also documents micro and macro changes that happen in nature. 

Spreading awareness 
One of the major activities of WANC is creating awareness among high school and pre-university students through nature camps. The three-day camps are organised in different biodiversity zones of the State like Devarayanadurga forest, Thimmalapura forest and Muthodi Wildlife Sanctuary. At the camps, students are educated through activities such as birdwatching and identifying local flora and fauna. “Such activities not only make them aware of nature and its creatures, but also help them develop good hobbies,” says B V Gundappa, WANC’s president. 

The number of participants is limited to 35 in such camps and the organisation’s members become the resource personnel. The camps are usually conducted during the weekends or holidays. In the last 26 years, about 20,000 students have participated in these camps. When the team noticed that there was more participation from urban students than from rural students in the camps, it collaborated with  the Department of Youth Services and Sports, and the Forest Department to take the awareness programmes to rural schools.

“In the initial years, when access to technical accessories was not this easy, we used to borrow slide projector and slides from WWF (Bengaluru),” says Gundappa. Gradually, the members ventured into photography and documented the biodiversity of Tumakuru, creating their own information resource.  

One more interesting activity of the organisation is the census of Asian water birds. In the period that spans from late December to January, the team covers 60-70 lakes in the district. A team of enthusiasts and experts head to different lakes in the district every Sunday. The team covers eight lakes a day, counting birds that have migrated from other regions of Asia to Tumakuru during winter. Through this activity they noticed the decline in the number of migratory birds in the district. 

Positive outcomes
They realised that pollution of water resources, specifically weeding of lakes, is the underlying cause. This led them to begin reviving the lakes and tanks in and around Tumakuru city with support from the district administration and Water Resources Department. Thus, WANC played a crucial role in rejuvenating about 40 water resources like the Tumakuru Amani Kere. Since the late 1990s, the organisation has also been conducting street plays and stage shows to create public opinion about the menace of plastic. People also remember the organisation’s contribution in ending wildlife hunting and curbing sand mining in the district.

Some of the other works of the organisation that brought positive outcome include the campaign to protect blackbucks in the district that led to the announcement of Jayamangali Blackbuck Conservation Reserve, and creating awareness among the locals, specifically students, about the importance of Nagavalli area as the habitat of slender loris. In fact, Nagavalli village has set an example for human-wildlife coexistence. Another important achievement of the organisation is that it halted 300 acres of forest area in Devarayanadurga from being allocated to Tumakuru University as its campus space. B V Gundappa remembers the incident vividly and how they were able to stay the move when it reached the Supreme Court. As a result, they were able to save a precious biodiversity zone from destruction. 

While some of the activities of the organisation are done on no-loss, no-profit  basis, some do not require financial transaction as they are mostly participatory. Although the organisation’s members work in different sectors, they are brought together by their passion for nature. While there are 15 core members, the membership has been increasing every year. 

They even visit wildlife sanctuaries outside the State to learn valuable conservation lessons and implement them here. The members meet every Saturday to share experiences and plan future activities. For more details, one can contact B V Gundappa on 9448617529.

(Translated by Anitha Pailoor)
ADVERTISEMENT