Additional Chief Secretary Arvind Jadhav on Wednesday said that the tourism department was keen on tying up with the Federation Internationale de I'Art Photographique (FIAP) and Federation of Indian Photography (FIP). 

ADVERTISEMENTAs fruits of a long term relationship with them he wants to showcase through a photo gallery what Karnataka has to offer to its guests.

Speaking at the inauguration of the 17th FIAP Nature Biennial World Cup and the launch of www.fiapworldcup. com website organised by FIP here, Jadhav said the department wants to ensure that tourism is the biggest contributor to the State GDP and the largest employment sector. 

“We know the impact photographs have on tourists and this is one of the best mediums to reach out to people, and we want to tap into it,” he added. 

For a tourist, Karnataka has an array of things to offer, this is both a boon and bane. He said: “We want to capture everything and showcase them through an image gallery.” 

Karnataka offers a piece of everything that a tourist looks for including beaches, wildlife, heritage, art and culture, modernity and global cuisines. It is a photographer’s haven with exclusive species for all and destinations waiting to be captured, he added.

Former additional principal chief conservator of forests and FIAP Chairman, M N Jayakumar pointed out that the largest number of wildlife and nature photographers in India come from the State and about 90 per cent of them are housed in Bangalore. 

Over the years, seven Indians have bagged the MFIAP award, six of them are from Karnataka and 13 Indians are Fellows of the Royal Photographic Society, of them 12 are from Karnataka. Also, there are only five Indians who have bagged both the titles and all of them are from the State.

An FIAP jury member and noted wildlife photographer B Srinivasa pointed out that Kabini was the best place in India to capture nature and wildlife, while for heritage it would be Vijaya Vittala temple in Hampi, simply because of the morning and evening light. Karnataka offers the best for a photographer’s frame, he added.

For Shivadarsha Bales, one of the Indian participants in the competition, Ranganathittu bird sanctuary is his photography haven. “I have travelled across India photographing since the 1990s. This is the first time I am participating. I like to photograph birds and my best destination is Ranganathittu Bird Sanctuary.”