Photographs are a visual delight at the NiceFoto exhibition. In its fifth edition, the show is displaying 110 photographs which have been curated from 18, 000 entries from across the world. The exhibition celebrates amateur photography by enthusiasts from across the world. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe festival is part of a series by Delhi Photography Club, which was started six years 
ago by Virendra Singh Shekhawat.Shekhawat tells Metrolife, “Photography is widely seen as a profession. But mostly it is pursued first as a hobby. There are many people who never pursue it as a profession. But their work is commendable.”

Shekhawat is part of the jury of eight which includes Indian photographer Ranjan Sharma, Egyptian photojournalist Mohammed Hossam and Portuguese filmmaker Joao Ponces de Carvalho. The exhibition has well arrayed landscapes, portraits of different genres of photography, like wildlife, street, festival and weddings. In last few years, Nicefoto has featured photos from interested people from China to United States covering all major states and the frames/shots will give you a glimpse of all these countries. Participants’ age can range from seven to seventy, but only unprofessional photographers. “People who want to get one level up and want to take their hobby seriously, can participate in this. The exhibition intends to spread the understanding of photography and the promotion of social connection among the amateur photographers,” says Shekhawat.

Urshita Saini is a law students, also a participant, says, “I started three years back, through weddings. I realised that I like taking pictures of people. Then throughout the last few years, I also digressed to street photography.”

Saini explains how she doesn’t have a particular interest, she loves to click people and wherever she goes, whatever opportunity she gets, she clicks anything to break the monotony of being under any one banner. This year her photo is of a child swinging on a makeshift cloth swing, a mid view of a high angle shot in a sepia mode.

On the other hand, some ‘amateurs’ with full-time jobs have been photography aficionados for over 10 years, but have never taken it up professionally.

Debajit Bose, 43, is a software engineer; his photographs have seen limelight in a few known publications like National Geographic etc. He says, “I am mostly interested in wildlife, I enjoy photography as a hobby and I will never stop. I always feel like taking it up as a full time profession, but have not seen any good opportunity till now.”

Bose’s photograph is a medium long shot of a deer vanishing into the forest during dusk. He took the picture in Bharatpur sanctuary a few years back. 

Participating in the exhibition is a high point for amateur photographers since they can’t afford to organise a solo exhibition for themselves for various reasons. The photographs selected represent a sampling of people from all walks of life.

NiceFoto will continue till October 28 at Open Palm Court Gallery, India Habitat Centre from 11 am to 8 pm.