The audience sat in rapt silence as photographs flickered to life on the big screen in front. Stunning visuals that captured the natural beauty around us were used to explain the nuances of taking that perfect shot. The setting was a talk in connection with ‘Nature InFocus’, Asia’s premier nature and wildlife photography festival. 

ADVERTISEMENTIt is a platform for passionate nature & wildlife photographers to showcase their work, learn from fellow photographers, discuss important and interesting topics as well as build awareness in the community regarding nature conservation.

The audience was comprised of photography enthusiasts, wildlife lovers, curious onlookers, naturalists, students and others. People sitting in the gathering could be seen taking notes as professional photographers talked about capturing the perfect light, shooting objects in motion, the importance of being quick while clicking pictures and more.

Eminent photography enthusiast Dinesh Kumble was one of the speakers at the event. Dinesh practiced photography with passion while pursuing his Master’s in Chemical Engineering in the US and is the author of several books as well. He spoke about how everyone is a photographer these days with the rise of mobile phone cameras as well as the selfie craze. “Every photograph tells a story, no matter which camera is used to shoot it. There are some basic things that everyone can learn to improve the level of their photography skills,” he said. While talking about his passion for wildlife photography, Dinesh said, “This field seems to be devoted to pictures of the big cats only now. There are many smaller mammals or insects that make for very interesting subjects as well.”

There was a galaxy of such illustrious speakers, from marine biologists to scientific advisors and environmentalists, who share a common love for photography and who also spoke at the event.

Talking about how useful these events are, Tanvi Dutta, a student, said, “It is a great place to meet many people who are involved with wildlife conservation as well as photography enthusiasts like me.There were also a lot of fantastic speakers here and to be exposed to the kind of research they have done is helpful. I have been listening to the tips that some of them have suggested and I want to try out some of them for myself. ”

Rohit Varma, one of the festival directors, said, “The inspiration was to translate our passion for photography into a larger message for the community. We talk about conservation and about species which people are not even aware of. This is a great opportunity for people to learn and explore.”

Speaking about the importance of photography for wildlife, Rohit said, “Photographers can do a lot. They can share their pictures with the forest department and NGOs and these can be used for multiple purposes. It generates interest among the citizens on these topics.”

The festival took place at the Indiranagar Club. The winners of the Photography Awards, held in connection with the festival, will be announced today at the venue.