Karnataka Forest Department is all set to declare Kammasandra reserve forest, 60 kilometres from Kolar, as a sanctuary. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe dry deciduous and scrub forest patch is spread across 7,800 hectares and is frequented by elephants during migratory season.

Additional Chief Secretary, Forest, Environment and Ecology, Mahendra Jain, told Deccan Herald, the aim of declaring Kammasandra reserve forest as sanctuary is to ensure better protection of wildlife, for people to know the place and promote eco-tourism. Trekking and tourism will be regulated after the notification. 

The proposal to declare Kammasandra as sanctuary was drafted eight months back. Former additional chief secretary Madan Gopal and Mahendra Jain had visited Kammasandra and Badamakanahalli reserve forest patches. Preliminary meetings were held and state wildlife board members also visited the forest in February. A final meeting of forest officials will be held in a week's time to declare Kammasandra as a sanctuary. 

Kammasandra forest patch is home to sloth bears, leopards and some herbivores. It is 20 km away from Badamakanahalli, which is home to blackbucks. The forest department has also initiated process to declare Badamakanahalli as blackbuck sanctuary. 

Praveen Bhargav, Trustee, Wildlife First, said the government was empowered to notify any area comprised within reserved forests, which has adequate ecological significance, as a sanctuary under Section 26A of Wildlife Protection Act, 1972.

This would be a final sanctuary notification and any rights admitted during the forest settlement process and recorded in the reserved forest notification would continue. A preliminary notification under Section 18 and the settlement process prescribed under Sections 19 -25 will not apply while notifying reserved forests as a sanctuary.  

Kammasandra also has bamboo cultivation patches. Forest officials point that once declared as sanctuary, funds for development will flow, wildlife grazing will be curtailed, forest patch and water holes will be improved. There are four natural water holes and they need desilting. 

Kammasandra is surrounded by eight villages and it connects to Krishnagiri in Tamil Nadu and Chittoor in Andhra Pradesh. The area also has historical importance because of the Tri-Junction board erected there during the British Era.