Pen to publishADVERTISEMENTAmazon’s Kindle Direct Publishing Pen to Publish Contest which encourages the work of self-published authors, across all genres, will launch its second edition this year. Winning authors in each language for long-form content (more than 10,000 words) will receive a prize of ₹5 lakh and a merchandising deal for the winning work, as well as 1-on-1 mentoring by a popular author. For more information, authors can visit www.amazon.in/pentopublish.Sales internshipPUMA Sports is hiring interns for Business Development profile in Chennai, Hyderabad and Bengaluru. Students with relevant skills can apply by November 1. The stipend is Rs 7,000-9,000 per month. Apply at: http://bit.ly/DH-315.Marketing internshipZoomcar India is hiring interns for Marketing profile in Bengaluru. Students with knowledge of MS-Office can apply by November 5. The stipend is Rs 3,000 per month. Apply at: http://bit.ly/DH-316.Web Development internshipNVIDIA, the GPU-accelerated computing company, is hiring interns for Web Development profile in Bengaluru. Students with knowledge of Python, Node.js, and Blockchain can apply by November 4. The stipend is Rs 20,000 per month. Apply at: http://bit.ly/DH-317.HR internshipChumbak is hiring an intern for Human Resources profile in Bengaluru. Students with knowledge of MS-Office and proficient in English can apply by November 2. The stipend is Rs 6,000 per month. Apply at: http://bit.ly/DH-318.Experience FridaysThe third edition of Experience Fridays is being held on October 26, 2018 in Bengaluru. Experience Fridays are events organised by Redd Experience Design to bring like-minded designers, business heads and others in the domain together for a discussion on significant topics. To register, go to http://link.redd.in/xf.Public policy summitIIM Bangalore announces the launch of ‘Utthan’, a public policy summit, to be held at IIMB on November 11, 2018. The theme is ‘De-globalisation – Is the tide reversing?’. Registration is free. For details, log on to https://bit.ly/2AdqdEI or http://www.iimb.ac.in/utthan-2018. Grant on tuition feesNanyang Academy of Fine Arts offers diplomas and degrees in 3D Design, Design and Media, Fashion Studies, Fine Art, Arts Management, Dance, Theatre and Music. For the August 2019 intake, Nanyang Academy of fine arts is inviting enrolments for the Aptitude Test to Qualify for the Up to 50% Scholarship (Tuition Grant)supported by the Ministry of Education Govt of Singapore, happening on November 24 in Bengaluru. For more details, log on to nafa.edu.sg or call 9845014592.Diplomacy & International Security courseA new course in Diplomacy & International Security has been launched at the University of Strathclyde. The MSc course will cover a broad range of international subjects in History, Politics and Law. It offers grounding for careers in areas including government, non-governmental organisations, international agencies, journalism, think tanks and law. The course begins in September 2019. For further information, mailto: hass-pg-enquiries@strath.ac.uk or log on to https://bit.ly/2Ac2i8s.Abdul Kalam fellowship2019 USF Abdul Kalam Postgraduate Fellowship launched by the University of South Florida is open for applications. For more information on the fellowship, visit http://bit.ly/KalamFellowship.Culture fellowshipsSenior/Junior Fellowship to Outstanding Persons in the Field of Culture 2018-19 invites applications from graduate artists for Senior or Junior Fellowship. The fellowship aims to award those artists who undertake research-oriented projects. The last date to submit applications is October 31, 2018. For more details, log on to https://bit.ly/2SeKpgc. Kalakriti fellowship The Sanskriti Pratisthan invites applications for Sanskriti - Kalakriti Fellowship 2018 from young artists of age group of 25 to 40 years. The key objective of the fellowship is to encourage young artists to enhance and develop their skills by incorporating different facets of their art and intensive practice. It would be a residency programme for a period of three months, which can be spread over the period of 10 months. The last date to apply is December 31, 2018. For details, log on to www.sanskritifoundation.org/Kalakriti-Fellowship.htm.International exchangeThe Swedish Institute promotes international exchange within the areas of culture, education, research, society as well as areas regarding international experiences and media. Applications are invited for the leadership programmes offered by the institute. For more details, log on to https://si.se/en/apply.Short video competitionVoluntary Organisation in Interest of Consumer Education invites applications for Jago Grahak Jago, a short video competition. The last date to submit films is November 30. All films have to be submitted online by emailing a form along with the film’s YouTube, Google Drive or we transfer link. For details, email events@consumer-voice.org, call 9667984141, 01147331000 or log on to https://www.consumer-voice.org/events/videos.Social venture competitionKalpavriksha invites applications from undergraduate and postgraduate students for social venture pitching competition. The last date to send applications is November 5, 2018. For details, log on to www.2018.iris-iimi.com/#events. Echoing Green’s Global Fellowship is open to any social entrepreneur, from anywhere in the world, with an innovative solution for any issue. The last date to send applications is October 30, 2018. For details, log on to www.echoinggreen.org/fellowship/apply.Wildlife internshipWildlife Crime Control Bureau provides internship opportunities for students to familiarise with various issues related to wildlife and the functioning of Wildlife Crime Control Bureau. For details, log on to https://bit.ly/2EEvNUD.BA Urban StudiesThe University of Sheffield, UK is inviting applications for BA Urban Studies course starting in September 2019. This three-year course gives students substantial knowledge of planning while offering the freedom to study a broader range of topics. For further information, contact - usp@sheffield.ac.uk; https://bit.ly/2CjZt6X.Tata Trusts scholarshipsTata Trusts invite applications for scholarships in the field of MSc in Neuroscience, Masters in Speech Therapy and DEd & BEd. Application forms will be available online till November 5, 2018. For further information, email at igpedu@tatatrusts.org or call up on 022-66657172 or log on to https://bit.ly/2Cl6rIZ.