Concerned over the alarming decline in bustard population, the union ministry of environment and forest has sought an action plan from states for the bird’s conservation.

ADVERTISEMENTThe ministry has identified three bustard species out of four — Great Indian Bustard, Lesser Florican and Bengal Florican — under the ‘species recovery’ component of the central sponsored scheme Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitats.

India is home to four species of bustards, including the Houbara Bustard. Since the last few decades, the population of these four species has been dwindling fast in the country.The Great Indian Bustard (GIB), which is the state bird of Rajasthan, has been classified ‘critically endangered’, the highest level of threat identified by the International Union for Conservation of Nature.

The winter count of the GIB in Rajasthan was registered at 89, a mere shadow of the pride that the state held once for having more than half of the its entire population in the country. The bird, found only in India, has its presence in Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Karnataka.

According to guidelines sent by the centre to the state, an action plan is to be constituted for a period of 10 years, indicating the year-wise activities to be undertaken.

As a first step, the state needs to constitute a Bustard Conservation Committee, comprising officials from the forest department, NGOs and panchayat members, among others. There may be a committee for the whole habitat landscape and it will help in preparing and executing the plan. The committee needs to survey areas for identifying breeding, nesting, roosting and non-breeding areas, major land-use pattern, and list of specific area-wise threats to the species.

Plans have also been floated for undertaking breeding programme by forming a trained workforce for conservation and preparing bustard gene banks. ‘Critical bustard sites’ will be declared as inviolate and no activities will be allowed, especially during breeding seasons. An area of 5-km radius around such sites will also be declared as ‘minimal infrastructure zone’.

Use of contemporary techniques such as satellite telemetry programme and microchips to understand the seasonal movement patterns and life history of the species have been proposed with participation of local communities.