The tigress that has evoked panic in Seethalayyanagiri - Mullayyanagiri region was spotted on the grassland near the underconstruction KSS resort near the city on Thursday morning.

ADVERTISEMENTThe forest department staff who were patrolling at Yelnur Khan road traced the tiger at around 9.20 am. Speaking to Deccan Herald, Wildlife activist G Veeresh said that two tiger cubs were found near KSS resort and the tigress was found behind the bush in Pandarahalli. In the last one month, a race horse and five cattle have fallen prey to the tigers at Atthigundi. 

Two teams of forest department officials and staff have camped at Seethalayyanagiri and Mullayyangiri region in the wake of spotting of a tigress with two cubs during last one week. The department officials and staff patrolled in jeeps on Mullayyanagiri road to instill confidence among  general public who are worried over the presence of tigress in the region.

Though the teams searched for the tigress throughout the day, the tigress was not found. A lorry driver has said that he saw the tigress near Seethalayyanagiri curve on Wednesday evening. As the driver stopped the lorry on spotting the tigress, forest department staff who soon arrived at the spot directed him to move from the spot. 

The department has requested people to take precautionary measures to prevent the tigress attacking cattle. Speaking to Deccan Herald, Chikmagalur Deputy Conservator of Forest Manik told Deccan Herald that coffee plantations and grass land in and around Channagondanahalli - Pandavarahalli have been the abode of tigress from several years. The large sized tigress is suspected to have arrived with its two cubs to the village in search of prey. People should be cautious while travelling or walking on this road. The department staff have been patrolling from 6 am to 9 pm, he said.

A rapid action unit has been brought to the region from Muthodi Wildlife Division. The unit comprises of modern equipment like a gun, torch, mike etc. 

Meanwhile, wildlife organisations too have cautioned the public not to intervene or disturb the tigress when it is with cubs, as it would invite a dangerous attack from the mother tigress. Chandradrona valley has been the abode of tigresss for a long time. The tigress population decreased due to hunting and destruction of forest. It was a common scene to find tigresss and leopards moving in coffee plantations in the past. As there are chances of the tigress panicking on seeing people and attacking them to protect its cubs, the people should avoid movement in that area for few days, D V Girish from Bhadra Wildlife Conservation Trust, Wildcat Organisation Managing Trustee Sridevi Hulikere and State Wildlife Board former member S Girijashankar have requested. They have also demanded the authorities to stop converting the forest as a concrete jungle and not permit the construction of resorts in forest areas.