Home, it is said, is where the heart is, which is why the demolition drive being carried out in Bengaluru, comes across as such a profound tragedy. It has resulted in broken homes as well as broken hearts. 

Few other words are so redolent of warmth and happiness as ‘home.’ It took a real-life experience to convey this to me. It happened years ago, but still remains fresh in my memory. I was then a homemaker with two small children. Every morning, I woke up to repetitive chores that soon morphed into an exhausting grind. Home felt more like a prison and I longed for a change. 

To break the monotony, my husband agreed to a weekend stay at a wildlife sanctuary some distance away. We set off in our trusty Fiat, unaware of what was in store for us. On the way, it started raining heavily. The car hit a bump and the axle broke. We were, it seemed, in the middle of nowhere and it took us hours to get going again. We were late in reaching the lodge and the room we had reserved had been given to someone else. We were accommodated in an outhouse, dingy and damp. 

The rains continued the next day turning our safari both unsuccessful and uninteresting. To cap it all, one of our children fell ill. It was with a sense of great relief that we reached home. “It’s so good to be back home,” I sighed. “Well,” answered my husband, “the battles were many, but the war has been won.” “What do you mean?” I asked. “You wanted a change that would make home a pleasant place and that’s exactly what has happened.” I agreed wholeheartedly.

Whether it is a hut or a mansion, home is a place that is close to one’s heart. What is the magic, the mystique that surrounds it? The secret lies in the fact that home is many things, all at the same time. As grammar has it, it can be a place, person or thing. It all depends on what you are searching for. 

First of all, it is a place that stands for comfort, good food and love. Who does not remember the nooks and corners of a happy and well-remembered childhood home? Here are born memories that are carried into adulthood and treasured forever. On the other hand, Robin Hobb, the writer, has gone so far as to say that home is people and not a place. And who can deny that home, robbed of loving, familiar faces, seems cold and uninviting? All of us need the unconditional love and acceptance that home offers.

Of course, a home begins as a thing, a structure made of bricks and mortar; but when finished and occupied, the alchemy sets in. It acquires a heart and a soul and becomes “a thing of beauty and a joy forever.” All in all, a home is where the heart is!ADVERTISEMENT