Avian aficionados in the State can look forward to a chirpy time, come March 27. The three-day Karnataka bird festival beginning that day across 20 forests will have an action-packed itinerary for enthusiasts to enjoy and learn from. 

ADVERTISEMENTIt will be inaugurated at Ranganathittu bird sanctuary in Mandya district. The event is being organised by Karnataka Eco-tourism Development Board, the Forest department and R Square Consulting. 

Sarath Champati, lead trainer and advisor to the Board, said people who visit the forests are interested in large mammals like elephants and tigers and least attention is paid to birds. 

But during this festival, participants will walk through the natural trails in and around the forests, watching, photographing and learning about birds. This will become an annual affair. 

The aim of the festival is to draw the attention of enthusiastic budding conservationists to the varied bird species and explain to them about the various types of birds, their ecological importance and wetland conservation, he said.
 
Photography exhibition

The festival will comprise of a photography exhibition, a workshop on how to identify birds and their activities, panel discussion, quiz and sketching. The speakers include Bengaluru-based bird photographer Ramki Srinivasan, Delhi-based conservationists, bird watcher Bikram Grewal and Kolkata-based bird watcher Sumit Sen. They will be told about bird conservation and pressing issues like dwindling population of vultures and Great Indian Bustards. There will also be bird races, including one in Mysuru City. 

Bird-watching events will be held in Bandipur, Nagarahole, Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary, Kabini, Bhadra, BRT and other Jungle Lodges and Resorts properties. It is different from other bird festivals held across India. 

No cultural performances

There will be no cultural performances here. Around 200 participants, forest officials interested in birds, honorary wildlife wardens, bird enthusiasts and amateur bird watchers will participate. Around 1,000 people are expected to visit the festival in all 20 locations. Children are expected to take part in the various competitions.