In what may scuttle efforts in wildlife conservation, a black granite factory is being built illegally in the K Gudi eco-sensitive zone of the Biligiriranganatha-swamy Temple (BRT) Tiger Reserve. There are already three black granite quarries in the zone. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe illegal quarrying is happening on the borders of the wildlife zone of the BRT sanctuary, much to the chagrin of wildlife activists. 

They argue that the quarrying activities would imperil the lives of tigers, elephants, leopards and other animals on the verge of extinction in the forest. The factory, promoted by a private person, is coming up on 1.35 acres in Devarajapura village of the taluk and the site is just 2.5 km from the tiger reserve. The land conversion was done by the deputy commissioner’s office for industrial purposes in 2009. It has also secured approval from the district industries centre and the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board.    

Records in possession of Deccan Herald suggest that 10.52 hectares in the Punajanur state forest have been given on lease to Mysore Minerals. The site is just 700 meters from the forest area. A total of 10 acres have been leased to Mohan Enterprises in Jyothigowdanapura and the site is two km from the forest area.  

Two acres have been leased out in Melmala village to Bharat Granites company for 20 years. This site is 1.25 km from the border of the forest. All these firms have not taken permission from the Forest department as required under the Environment Protection Act, 1986.  
 
S S Lingaraj, Conservator of Forests of the BRT tiger reserve and director told Deccan Herald that as per a Supreme Court order, the area with a 10-km radius of the reserve forest should be declared an environmentally sensitive zone. 

He said they had submitted a report to the State government, asking it to declare the BRT reserve a sensitive zone. Quarrying is banned in the limits of the zone.He said they had also written to the deputy commissioner to cancel the licence given to the factory and the quarries.