Expressing concern over frequent ceasefire violations, Union Information and Broadcasting Minister Prakash Javadekar today cautioned Pakistan that it should avoid increasing tension along the border as it would not be beneficial to it.

"We fully believe Pakistan should mend its ways, because it would not be beneficial to Pakistan to increase tension with India," Javadekar said at a press conference here.

"They (Pakistan) are holding talks with terrorists, then with us... This will not work... Talks on border is already being continued in flag meetings...," he said, reiterating Prime Minister Narendra Modi's views.

"We are always worried about Pakistan, what is happening in Pakistan. Former Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee used to say a phrase: you can choose a friend, not a neighbour... Pakistan is our neighbour," Javadekar said.

"We want stability and prosperity in Pakistan because that is how we both (India-Pak) can progress together," he said.ADVERTISEMENT
"But unfortunately, the fragility which we are experiencing in Pakistan has made the situation a little difficult. We will try our best for good relations," he said.

"What Pakistan is doing for the last 15 days reflects its domestic situation...," he said.

On a question related to e-waste and its proper disposal, Javadekar, who also holds the environment portfolio, said his ministry was considering a new policy for quick and easy disposal of e-waste, including old computers and gadgets.

Companies selling computer and other gadgets should also introduce buy-back scheme to procure old products from customers. Scientific disposal of e-waste would also be devised, and new rules would be framed soon, he added.

On alleged corruption in the film censor board after its CEO Rakesh Kumar was arrested by CBI on bribery charges, the minister said the board would be reconstituted soon in which experienced art and film personalities would be included, besides a media vigilance.

Hailing achievements of the Modi government in its first 100 days, he said hoarding of wheat and rice has been contained by releasing 100 lakh tonnes of foodgrains in the open market, and movement of prices of essential commodities was being monitored constantly by concerned union ministers and observed by the Prime Minister.

On petrol price reduction twice in recent times, the minister said he would ask his fellow minister in petroleum ministry to effect prices in round figures to maintain market.

He said the Modi government was effecting changes as per fluctuation in prices of crude oil in international market immediately, unlike the erstwhile UPA government that delayed the process.

India's economy expanded at its fastest pace in more than two years in the April-June quarter, when the growth was rate recorded at 5.7 per cent, he claimed. Now with better GDP figures not only FDI was increasing even the Indian investors were keen on doing business in India, he added.

Coal production was rose to 16 per cent and power generation was up by 10 per cent, he said, adding that there was power crisis due to 10 to 30 per cent rainfall deficit in the country, and it will be improved shortly, he said.

The minister said earlier companies and the state government had "environment phobia or apprehension", but now it has been removed by simplifying rules and by bringing transparency in the whole system. 

The Information and Broadcasting minister said Prasar Bharti, Doordarshan, AIR and PIB would be revamped to meet the present-day challenges challenge and competition with private TV channels.

Bollywood actor Aamir Khan's popularity on the show 'Satya Mev Jayate' was the biggest boost for DD, he said.

However when his attention was drawn to the controversy surrounding Aamir's 'PK' poster, the minister pleaded ignorance, saying "I do not know... I used to read 40 papers prior to take over as minister... Now I hardly find time to read more."

Expressing his serious concern on forest cover and deforestation, the minister said as a matter of fact the green cover in the country has risen to 24 per cent, a 2 per cent increase in recent years, and "we aim to increase the green cover to 33 per cent".

Earlier, the Union Minster inaugurated a three-day photography exhibition at Jawahar Kala Kendra. The 65-panel exhibition has been set up by well-known Gujarat-based photographer Mona Patel.

It shows rare shots of tigers in both the Ranthambore and Sariska tiger reserves as well as lion of the Gir forest.

"The exhibition is a great effort to create an awareness about conservation of the wildlife and environment," Javadekar said.