The 10th district Kannada literary meet passed seven resolutions at the valedictory, here at Mudigere on Friday. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe resolution urged the authorities to develop the birth place of Lakshmisha at Devanur in Kadur and S V Parameshwara Bhat’s birthplace near Vidyaranyapura Sadashiva Temple.  Memorials should be built and programmes should be conducted every year. About 30 acre land should be earmarked to Tejaswi Pratishtana. 

It urged to set up fast track courts to deal with the issues of atrocities on women. 
The resolution urged the government to withdraw Tiger project. The authorities should fulfil the dreams of Poornachandra Tejaswi by emphasising on conserving wildlife and environment. Farmers who are residing on Inam land in Kalasa hobli should not be evicted. 

Dr Ambale Krishna Shastri memorial has remained neglected in Ambale. 
The district administration should take immediate steps to complete the project. The authorities should check illegal sand mining, to save ecology in Malnad. 

It also urged the government to conduct Hoysala Siri Utsava on the lines of Hampi Utsava, in Mudigere Taluk’s Angadi Kshetra. 

Farmers protect forest

Advocate Sudhir Kumar Maroli said that if the farmers make use of the forest land, the forests will be developed.

He was speaking at a session on ‘the challenges of environmental conservation’, organised as a part of the meet. 

“Multi-national companies should be restricted from purchasing land in India and the move of outsiders who buy the land for commercial purposes should be strongly opposed,” he said. Litterateur Kenjige Sathish who presided over the session said that science alone can conserve the forests and the environment. 

Convention President H M Nagaraj Rao, Kannada Sahitya Parishat District President N S Shivaswami, Yajna purush Bhat, Nataraj K Guddethota, Distrcit Kannada Sahitya Parsihat Honorory President Sringeri Subbanna and others were present. 

Poets meet

Dadapeer of Tarikere read out a poem penned by him based on the Delhi gang rape incident, Minakshi Kantharaj presented a poem written on physical disability. Besides this, many poems on the flora fauna of Karnataka won the hearts of many.
Mysore University retired professor Dr G S Jayappa Gowda presided over the poet’s meet.