Alleging that the Central Empowered Committee (CEC) has come out with an adverse report regarding the Kadamakkal road issue in Pushpagiri Wildlife Sanctuary in Kodagu, the leaders have decided to appeal against the report in the Supreme Court.

ADVERTISEMENTA seminar on the CEC report held at Patrika Bhavan was attended by Assembly Speaker K G Bopaiah, MLA M P Appacchu Ranjan, former MLA S G Medappa, senior advocate A K Subbaiah, ZP president Shantheyanda Ravi Kushalappa, coffee grower Nanda Belliappa, Kodava Samaja president Mathanda Monnappa and others. It was Air Marshal K C Cariappa (retired) who approached the Supreme Court to prevent laying of a road in Kadamakkal forest in 2008. 

The Supreme Court had constituted the CEC to look into the issue. The CEC submitted its report to the Court in February. The CEC report has recommended to take over baane land and forest grown on private land.

Forum constituted

To fight against the CEC report, Kodagu Janapara Horata Vedike was also constituted on the occasion. The meeting decided to raise donations from the public to bear the expenses to fight against the CEC report.

The vedike will create awareness against the CEC report and also appraise the Supreme Court on the need for Kadamakkal road inside the forest.

The forum will be apolitical and members will include people from all walks of life. The fee to be paid for the lawyer will be collected from the public. A separate finance committee was also constituted on the occasion.

The meeting decided to submit three appeals against the CEC report in the Supreme Court.

The first appeal would be by the tribals who reside in and around Kadamakkal to appraise Supreme Court on the need for a road. 

The second appeal would deal with the right to live in rural areas with all basic facilities. As road is one of the basic needs, coming in the way of laying a road would amount to coming in the way of right to live. The growers would also question the CEC report and its recommendations on baane land. Making a reference to the CEC report, which states that all circulars issued by the state government with regard to felling timber in Kodagu should be withdrawn and areas with characteristics of forest should be called ‘deemed forests’.

Addressing the gathering, Assembly Speaker K G Bopaiah said that there is a need to argue on the need for baane land in Kodagu. 

Advocate A K Subbaiah said: “The MLA had taken up the work on Kadamakkal road based on the demands of the people. It is the duty of the MLA to respond to the needs of the people. There is nothing wrong in the move of the MLA. The people of the district should support the elected representatives.”