The State Forest department is preparing a report on ways to mitigate the impact on the environment in Kodagu, when the 400 KV high tension power line is laid.

ADVERTISEMENTThe report on the environment mitigation plan comprises short-term and long-term measures.

The measures are being listed keeping in mind development and protection of green cover. 

It will be sent to the government by the end of this week, which will then be forwarded to the Power Grid Corporation and the Union government for funds and approval, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (wildlife) Vinay Luthra told Deccan Herald. 

Some of the listed measures include organising anti-depredation camps, building better barriers, not disrupting the existing waterholes,  providing natural fodder spaces for animals, not using weapons against animals and if carrying weapons, getting them registered with the Forest department to ensure that animals are not harmed, not coming in contact with animals, not indulging in afforestation activities, not camping inside forest areas, reducing loss of green cover as much as possible and in regard to work in forest areas, ensuring that all permissions have been obtained and following rules like no-stay inside the forest during night hours, not hunting, not entering restricted forest area without permission and so on. 

The report plans to ensure that no human or animal casualty is reported, but in the last 30 days two people have died due to man-elephant conflict and one person sustained injuries while working near coffee estates. 

The power line from Mysuru to Kozhikode will pass through Kodagu. Of the 210-km line, 50 km will pass through coffee and paddy fields in Kodagu and the rest is through pristine Western Ghats regions - touching borders of Nagarahole Tiger Reserve, Dubare and Devamachi Reserve Forests. 

This line is part of the central power grid project and will supply power to many southern regions, including Bengaluru. 

Due to protests, this project been delayed by over five years. Lines have already been laid till Mysuru and Kerala, except some patches in Wyanad. It was to be completed in 2007, but was stalled. Work started again in November 2014.

During a meeting of agitators from Kodagu and power corporation companies last week, Energy Minister D K Shivakumar affirmed that the project would not be held back or delayed further. Shivakumar said that the project was important for Bengaluru and industries, to ensure 22-hour power supply daily, especially during summers. But agitators from Kodagu said that it was a scam. C P Muthanna, a retired colonel in the Army and president of the Coorg Wildlife Society, pointed out that there was already a 220-KV line in the region, which can be upgraded to 400 KV and used, instead of occupying fresh land and axing over 50,000 trees for the new line.
DH News Service