The Karnataka government has decided to construct four three-star hotels at world-famous tourist destinations like Hampi, Badami, Belur and Vijayapura at a cost of Rs 84 crore. While the intent behind the move may be good as it aims to promote tourism, the bigger question is, should the government be involved in the business of hospitality? When it comes to non-core areas of governance, the state’s role should be limited to that of an enabler and facilitator. Instead of stretching its limited resources, the government should create a favourable atmosphere for the private sector to invest, as is the case in most parts of the world. The government, on the other hand, should concentrate on providing basic infrastructure like toilets, good roads, connectivity, upkeep of monuments, cleanliness and safety of tourists, most of which are lacking in several holiday spots today. Investing in star-hotels without first providing the minimum amenities required, amounts to putting the cart before the horse.ADVERTISEMENTKarnataka has rightly been described as ‘One state, many worlds’ as it has something of interest for all categories of tourists:  ancient temples, palaces, forts, historic monuments, hill stations, wildlife sanctuaries, beaches, not to mention Bengaluru’s famous watering holes. Yet, the tourist footfall is much below expectation due to the poor infrastructure and the failure of the government to market the potential of the state to a global audience. Though the services offered by Karnataka State Tourism Development Corporation (KSTDC) and Jungle Lodges and Resorts are on a much higher par than that of other similar state-run organisations, it is far from the gold standard that a discerning tourist would expect. A few years ago, there was a proposal to privatise loss-making KSTDC hotels, but not much seems to have come of it. Instead of expansion and consolidation, the government should opt for complete disinvestment or at least lease out the properties to private players so that they can be run professionally. This will not only save precious recourses but will also help the government earn some revenue.The state government should take a leaf out of the Centre which has privatised several India Tourism Development Corporation (ITDC) properties, including the iconic Hotel Ashok in Bengaluru. It should also look at replicating the homestay model of Kodagu and Chikkamagaluru, which while providing an additional source of revenue to local people, enables the tourist to savour the culture and cuisine of the region. Unless the government concentrates on providing basic infrastructure and safety of travellers and leaves the hospitality and service part to the private sector, which is better equipped to handle them, tourism will never flourish in Karnataka.