In a bid to create awareness on wildlife conservation among students, especially those living on the fringes of forests, authorities at the Rajiv Gandhi National Park, Nagarahole, have come up with a unique programme: To take students on safaris around the park and train them on the importance of wildlife conservation.

ADVERTISEMENTThe first batch of 25 students from DD Urs College, Hunsur in Mysuru district, participated in the programme, which was launched on Monday.

Speaking with Deccan Herald, R Gokul, director of the National Park, said they had plans to organise the programme for a minimum of 1,000 students every year with weekly programmes for 25 students in a batch. “We have decided to concentrate on students from schools and colleges of Hunsur, Periyapatna, H D Kote and Virajpet taluks, which are located around the national park,” he said.

The programme, which involves a one-night stay at Nagarahole, will be free. Funds under the Tiger Conservation Foundation of the National Tiger Conservation Authority will be used for the programme. He said the cost per student would not exceed Rs 100 and Rs 10 lakh has been earmarked for the programme for the current financial year.

He said most of the students under the programme will be children from 130 villages around the park. “Even though the children stay close to the park, they are not provided an opportunity to visit it. By giving them an opportunity, we also hope to brief them on the efforts involved in conserving wild animals and environment and the importance of 
the same, he said.

Under the programme, children are introduced to the key concepts of conservation in a ‘Nature Class’. After lunch, they are taken on a safari inside the park, when the measures taken to avoid man-animal conflict and other issues are explained. After the evening safari, the students stay at the park overnight. Another safari is arranged for them the next morning, before they are sent back home.

Gokul said such programmes, aimed primarily at children from taluks around the park, will assist in increasing local participation in conservation efforts.