Her soulful tunes have regaled us on several occasions. From singing romantic numbers to devotional songs, singer-composer Nandini Srikar has dabbled in different aspects of music making, thus becoming one of the few singers who have managed to successfully come up with independent ventures, while pursuing a commercial playback career. 

Having started her musical journey at the tender age of three, Nandini trained herself and went on to play several instruments including the veena, sitar and later the guitar. “I come from a musical family. My mother is a professional Carnatic singer. So in a way, I was a natural. I was instantly drawn to music. I would play different instruments by instinct. I would pick them up one after another and start practising on them without actually being instructed or trained. For me, music just happened.”

With this natural talent, music would have only been an ideal vocation. But this versatile singer had to explore other avenues before she could realise her true calling. Despite her passion for music, Nandini also pursued her education with dedication and landed a job in the IT sector. But soon the staid and stagnant nature of her job lured her back to music. “I felt that I didn’t belong in the rat race and I needed a creative outlet. I had to come back to music, which was my haven,” she explains. 

And she did come back with full vigour to make a name for herself in the industry. She was soon discovered by singer Hariharan, who recommended her to composer Vidyasagar and she got her first break in playback singing for the Tamil film Uyirodu Uyiraga. 

“Hariharan noticed my talent when I performed during a stage show and he soon started suggesting my name to other composers and opportunities started pouring in. Especially from the Tamil music industry, and there was no looking back,” the talented musician says. Nandini went on to sing melodies for Tamil films including Aalavandhan, Joot, Morning Raga, Urchagam and Moondru Per Moondru Kaadhal. Apart from singing in Tamil, Nandini has also sung for Hindi movies including Humko Deewana Kar Gaye, Drona, Barah Aana, Ra.One, Agent Vinod and Shanghai.

However, like many artistes, Nandini didn’t limit herself to playback singing. She also got into advertising and has released several successful ad jingles for popular national and international brands. She soon ventured into programming and even started composing songs. In 2001, she was featured on Pakistani musician Mahmood Khan’ s album Panah. But in 2011, Nandini came out with her debut solo album, Beete Pal, in which she composed, programmed, produced and performed all the songs. The album features Kai Eckhardt (bass), Prasanna (guitar), Michael Pope (bass), Steve Zerlin (bass), Atma Anur (drums), Ed DeGenaro (guitar) and other musicians. When asked to describe her music, Nandini pauses and says, “My music is a reflection of the experiences and influences I have had as a musician. It is a mix of several genres, from Hindustani classical to jazz. I don’t restrict myself to a particular style. My music has no boundaries.” ADVERTISEMENTCurrently, Nandini has turned her attention to the wildlife cause, and is a part of Animal Planet’s Yeh Mera India show. The show that kicked off this Independence Day, has a catchy anthem composed by Bollywood’ s eminent music directors Salim and Sulaiman Merchant, and is sung by Salim, June Banerjee and Nandini Srikar in Hindi, Bengali and Tamil, respectively. The show focuses on rare and endangered species that have made our country their home. Speaking about the anthem, Nandini says, “The cause is very close to my heart. Most of us are unaware of the importance of wildlife in our ecosystem. Our aim is to let people know about these fascinating creatures that are slowly being pushed into oblivion. The Yeh Mera India anthem has a very catchy and upbeat feel to it. 

This is basically to attract youngsters and educate them. I thoroughly enjoyed the experience of performing the song and am proud to be a part of this noble initiative.”
So, what next for this multi-talented artiste? Making more of her kind of music, of course. Nandini is all set for her next venture, which is a collaboration with British-Asian instrumentalist Shri and DJ Badmarsh.