You need not travel to forest areas or visit the Bannerghatta Biological Park to see peafowls walking around, dancing or basking in the sun. This is a daily sight for residents of Beggars’ Colony, off Magadi Road. 

ADVERTISEMENTWalkers are often greeted by pleasant calls of peafowls and if they get lucky, some even cross their path. Spread across 162 acres, Nirashrithara Parihara Kendra, popularly known as Beggars’ Colony, is now home to as many as 100 peafowls. Around 300 walkers residing in the vicinity visit the premises for a daily walk. 

Residents attribute this sudden increase in the peafowl population to the afforestation drive undertaken by the Bangalore Development Authority (BDA), which started two years ago. BDA has planted over 39 tree species, including sandalwood, fruit and flower bearing species. The plantation was done across 60 acres and will be handed over to Colony officials on March 31, 2015; after the contract tenure is over. 

 Speaking to Deccan Herald, K Ramegowda, colony manager, said: “ About  ten years back, inmates and staff would occasionally spot a peafowl pair. But now there are over 100 of them. Many walkers spot them during their walks.” He added that though the area is well protected from encroachers and poachers, the increasing street dog menace has put young peafowls in danger. “

 The premises is clean and garbage free, but the dogs hunt for peafowls and the young ones fall prey. We have guards patrolling round the clock but even if they chase the dogs away, they return. We have also requested the Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike to help us. But we were told that they will only vaccinate and not relocate them.”

The colony officials feel the population of peafowls is increasing because people have not harmed them so far. After the BDA hands over the contract to the colony, a nominal entry fee would be introduced for walkers. Also after the road widening work on Magadi Road is complete, more security guards will be deployed to protect the peafowls in the campus.

 The Colony staff is also planning to contact the forest department for better protection of the birds. Peacock is the National Bird of India and is listed under Schedule One Part Three of the Wildlife Protection Act. Killing or harming the bird is prohibited under law.