Situated amidst tall deodar trees, along the banks of River Lohawati, Lohaghat offered me a calm, crisp and completely refreshing atmosphere during the month of December. It is a beautiful winter destination located 63 km away from Pithoragarh at an altitude of 1,750 m. 

ADVERTISEMENTUnlike other hill resorts in the northern Himalayan belt, it is neither snow-bound in winter nor overcrowded during the summer.

Lohaghat is truly amazing for its scenic splendour. It is especially popular for an enchanting excursion to Pancheshwar, situated at a distance of 47 km from Lohaghat. We witnessed a beautiful confluence of rivers Kali and Saryu at Pancheshwar. Throughout the region, this locale is famous for the Chaumu Temple and its annual fair. Apart from the traditions, Pancheshwar’s surroundings provided us the perfect location to experience the beauty of spectacular Himalayas.

The next day, after enjoying a delicious breakfast at our hotel, we decided to explore the Banasur Fort (also known as Kotalgarh), situated six km away, towards the west of Lohaghat. This fort is constructed on a ridge, in a charming valley, at an altitude of 1,920 m. 

According to legend, Kotalgarh is fabled to have been the stronghold of the demon Bana Asura, the son of Mahabali, who fought with Lord Vishnu.

Abbot Mount is another spectacular location. It is a captivating resort amidst dense forests of oak and deodar. This dazzling locale is noted for its scenic charm and breathtaking views of the Himalayan peaks. This place is truly captivating for nature lovers and wildlife enthusiasts.

Excursions from Lohaghat lead to Champawat, the capital of this beautiful region. Situated at a distance of 13 km from Lohaghat, Champawat is famous for its historical, sculptural and archaeological remains. Champawat, from where the Chand dynasty ruled, holds ruins of past glory.

The next morning, we visited Manch and Guru Goraknath’s dhuni. Manch is situated amidst thick forest near Champawat. These forests are manifestations of the deep-rooted local tradition of forest preservation. The dhuni, dedicated to Guru Goraknath, is a sacred fire that burns continuously. One has to trek around 1.5 km to reach this sacred spot. We really had an enjoyable time at this sacred place.

Among fine remains in Champawat, we found the Durga temples to be note-worthy. The carvings and paintings on the ceilings of these temples are evidence of the ancient glory and artistic excellence of the Chand era. The grandeur and magnificence undoubtedly left us without words.
After spending an entire day in Champawat, we returned to Lohaghat in the evening. 

If you really want to get the best out of your trip, it is advisable to explore Lohaghat between November and February. The weather is pleasant during November and December, and there is a healthy nip in the air.