Refusing to grant any immediate relief to notorious wildlife smuggler Sansar Chand, the apex court said there was rampant killing of wild animals and smuggling of animal skins in the country.

A bench of Justice Markandey Katju and Justice T S Thakur said: “You are selling the skin of tigers and leopards. Tomorrow, you would sell even human skin. In this way, the population of tigers and leopards would be wiped out in the country. There would be no tiger left in Sariska.”

With about 1,141 tigers remaining in wild, the court observed: “You are all interested in money. You want only money. Everything in the country is commercial. Today, people will sell the skin of animal, tomorrow they would start selling human skin also.”

Chand, who is undergoing a jail-term for five years in a case related to smuggling of claws, skin, teeth and other animal parts in Bhilwara in 2003, had filed a petition last year challenging his conviction by the Rajasthan High Court. 

NGOs such as Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI) and Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) have also been allowed to file an intervention petition.

Chand, now lodged in an Ajmer prison, has several wildlife cases against him including those related to the disappearance of tigers from Sariska. He has been involved in poaching activities for over three decades. In 2006, interrogated by the CBI, Chand reportedly admitted to selling 470 tiger skins and 130 leopard skins to just four clients from Nepal and Tibet.  

In his confessional statement before the CBI, Chand had reportedly revealed his modus operandi of killing wild animals including tigers and leopards  and procuring their hides, bones and meat for export.

He has also confessed the names of his contacts abroad including in China, Hong Kong and Singapore. ADVERTISEMENT‘Clarify stand on women in Army’
The Supreme Court on Monday asked the Centre to clarify whether it is planning to grant permanent commission to women Army officers from Short Service Commission in other wings apart from the education and legal departments. The court asked the  Solicitor General to clarify whether there is any plan to expand the scope for employing women in other wings, reports DHNS.