Dear Sir,ADVERTISEMENTI have just completed Class 12 with History, Economics, Sociology and Psychology as subjects. I am planning to take an integrated law course next year but I haven’t started any preparation yet. Can I skip CLAT and still get a seat in a good college or should I start training for CLAT now? AishaDear Aisha,CLAT is the entrance exam for the National Law Schools and some other reputed institutions. Details of registration process are given in www.clat.ac.in. There is another exam, LSAT, for another 80 reputed law colleges (www.pearsonvueindia.com/lsatindia). Many other law colleges have their own admission process, primarily based on your marks in 12th and interview. Admissions in these colleges are open now so you will not miss an academic year. Not much preparation is needed.Dear Sir,I am a PUC II student (PCMB). I am interested in pursuing Biology, Zoology in particular. I am thinking of taking up Biotechnology. Are there any other options? I want to take up research in the future.ShubhangiDear Shubhangi,Zoology offers many challenging careers. You can appear for the Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana (KVPY) exam which is held in November every year and will get you admission in one of the IISERs, in IISc and other such reputed institutions. If you do not qualify inKVPY you can take up a BSc in Zoology with allied subjects in a good college, and start preparing in your final year of degree to get into postgraduate courses either abroad or in India in institutions such as Wildlife Institute, Forest Research Institute,
National Centre for Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, National Institute of Advanced Studies, etc.Dear Sir,I have completed PUC II (PCMB) this year. I want to take up BE (Biotechnology). Can you please inform about the scope and job opportunities in this field. And what options are available if I want to do Masters?NaziyaDear Naziya,Admission to BE Biotechnology is the same as for other branches of engineering. It is a specialised field offering good challenges to those who are genuinely interested in its constituents, which are microbiology, genetics and biochemistry. A few years ago there was a deluge of students opting for it, hence there was a surplus of graduates.  Lately, the craze has come down, and a few engineering colleges are also closing this department to set right the imbalance. On a long-term, there is good potential for you to work in application areas ranging from health, pharmacy, agriculture, animal welfare, human genetics, and many more. You can opt to work in applications ranging from production, product development, research, documentation, quality control, teaching, sustainable development, human development etc. Only when you come to the final year of your degree you should decide about doing your Masters, as there is a wide range as mentioned above, and then you will have clarity as to what you would like to specialise in. Dear Sir,I have completed Diploma in Computer Science engineering. And I want to take up hotel management as my career. My goal is to become a brewmaster. Are there good brewing schools in India? 
NiranjanDear Niranjan,If you are very clear in your mind that despite having studied Computer Science engineering you would like to get into brewing, then do find out exhaustively about the field as it is an unusual one. There do not seem to be any exclusive brewing schools in India, hence you may have to study abroad. On the other hand, if you wish to first
qualify yourself in hotel management, then you will have to take admission in a four-year Bachelor of Hotel Management (BHM) or a three-year BSc Hospitality course, and then specialise. We have many reputed colleges for these courses in India.Dear Sir, I am studying in Class 10 (ISCE). I would like to have a career that encourages my skills in gaming, photo editing and video editing. And I like Science. What opportunities do I have and what courses should I take in Plus Two?AbhineethDear Abhineeth,You can choose between two paths — do a degree in Computer Science engineering and then move on to design, or after your 12th (you can study science at +2 but it is not essential) take up a 3 or 4 year degree course called Bachelor of Design (BDes) or Bachelor of Visual Arts (BVA). Such courses are offered by many reputed institutions all over India, including the IITs (admission tests are different from JEE etc, and they test your creativity). Some institutions take you through all aspects of design and visual communication, while others offer a choice from many specialisations. If you are sure of the specific area of design then you can go for the latter. Do get your creative skills tested out by experts (not by coaching centres of the institutions offering the courses).Dear Sir, I am a Commerce student (11th) and I am confused about my future. I want to become an advocate but not sure about the future course of action. GrishmaDear Grishma, To become a successful advocate, you need the following skills — good command over language, both written and verbal, deep memory, analytical and sequential thinking, ability to convince, and a good understanding of human behaviour.  Five-year law courses open to students who complete +2 with any optional subjects (some institutions offer a choice between BA+LLB, BBA+LLB and BCom+LLB) are available all over the country. The most reputed institutions are the National Law Schools for which admission is through the CLAT exam, while many other reputed institutions offer admission through the LSAT test. Various other local colleges hold their own entrance tests. Start preparing for legal reasoning, which is a compulsory paper in the entrance exams.