Obstacle racing, that pulsating mix of hyper-active adventure, rugged trekking, endurance walks through relentless woods is finally here. For the first time in this part of the world, the event will unfold as Earth Quest, a three-day Mud Festival in Coorg from April 17 to 19. A test of stamina, strength and skills, the race couldn’t have got tougher!

ADVERTISEMENTRunning through rivers, ditches, hills, woods and open paddy fields, the race is inspired by the globally renowned Spartan Race. Devised by adventure travel buff Ricky Monnappa and wildlife photographer Uthaiah Cheppudira, the event has on its side, live music shows, art installations, flea markets and more. 

For starters, obstacle racing has the contestants travel on foot and overcome a slew of physical challenges lined up as obstacles. Mud and trail runs are combined to make the races extremely tough to endure. The competitors are pushed to the limits of their mental and physical endurance. 

Explained Monnappa, “Obstacles include, but are not limited to, climbing over walls, carrying heavy objects, traversing bodies of water, crawling under barbed wire, and jumping through fire.”

Many obstacles are similar to those used in military training, while others are unique to obstacle racing.

But why call it a mud festival? “For once, you are not actively trying to avoid the mud. Instead, you are told to go through it. Not only does traversing an obstacle course race while you are soaked with mud add a level of difficulty to your run, but it is downright fun. Admit it, your inner child comes out when there are giant mud puddles to splash in.” This is the Earth Quest rationale, as elaborated by Uthaiah.

Beyond adventure, the event is also designed as a platform for dynamic social gathering. 
“The aspect of camaraderie within these races is the backbone of ongoing wellness. You can turn your training, your fitness, and your ‘working out’ into a social gathering, enabling a group of people to help you meet your fitness goals on an ongoing basis.”

The event has another key objective: Clean Coorg, a campaign to be executed jointly by the crew and participants. “Signboards with responsible tourism quotes will be placed all along the route. Travellers to the event will be educated on social media about responsible tourism. Recycled bins will be installed everywhere on the route map,” said Monnappa. 

For more on the event, check the website: www.the-earthquest.com or log on to their Facebook page at: www.-facebook.com/theearthquest