We’re flying over the channels and islands on the western periphery of the vast Okavango Delta, as part of the Botswana leg of an Africa-wide project known as the Great Elephant Census.

ADVERTISEMENT The year long project began in February and encompasses 18 countries - the first pan-African aerial survey of savanna elephants since the 1970s. “The truth is that the current population of elephants in Africa remains unknown,” says Chase, who is founder and lead researcher for the project, “The last surveys in some areas were done 15 to 20 years ago.”

According to a 2007 report, there could be anywhere from 472,000 to 690,000. But some experts believe the number may be as low as 250,000. Founder of the Botswana-based nonprofit Elephants Without Borders, Chase has spent the past 15 years collecting unprecedented data on the status of elephants and other wildlife in Botswana, identifying cross-border elephant corridors, and discovering new migration routes.

So far, overflights of two of the 18 targeted countries have been completed, and surveys are under way in 10 others. “If we know more, then we have a chance of conserving the elephants,” he says. “What we do know is that in 2013 we lost 96 elephants a day in Africa.” We also know, without any doubt, that elephants in most parts of their range are declining.

Botswana: An elephant haven

Botswana is a happy exception to that trend. The northern part of the country, encompassing the entire Okavango Delta - an inland delta fed by the waters of the Okavango River, which evaporates in the sands of the Kalahari Desert and never reaches the ocean - has one of the few growing elephant populations left on the continent. The best recent estimates, widely divergent and based on aerial counts in 2010 and 2012, puts Okavango’s elephant numbers at 130,000 and 207,000, respectively. Whatever the exact number, the patchwork of islands, channels, and floodplains of the Okavango are a seasonal refuge for thousands of elephants and other wildlife. This extraordinary landscape was designated Unesco’s 1,000th world heritage site on June 22, and its new status may make it an even safer haven for elephants in the years to come.

The census team comprises a pilot, two observers (or spotters), and one person who captures each sighting on a GPS device. The total numbers of sightings - of elephants, as well as buffaloes, giraffes, and hippos - are crunched in a complex algorithm that also accounts for the size of the area surveyed and the number of transects flown. It’s the standard methodology for strip-transect sampling, which has been widely used for aerial surveys of large African herbivores.

“We found a mega-herd of about 500 elephants last week,” Landen says. “When elephants are stressed, they bunch together in large groups. The average herd size in the delta is between 10 and 20, but on the periphery, especially closer to human settlements, they face persecution, so they cluster in bigger numbers for safety.”

Elephant refugees

“People say Botswana is not impacted by poaching, but in an indirect way, it is,” Chase says. “Many of the elephants in this country are political refugees,” fleeing from Zimbabwe and Zambia, where poaching is heavy, into the Okavango and southward into Makgadikgadi Pans National Park.
When Chase started studying elephants in the Okavango, very little was known about their seasonal migrations and dispersal patterns. His early research revealed that significant numbers of elephants were seasonally moving into southeastern Angola, repopulating the area after that country’s civil war ended in 2002.
That insight, and knowledge of other elephant dispersal patterns, led to the establishment of the Kavango-Zambezi Transfrontier Conservation Area (KAZA), designed to link five African countries - Namibia, Botswana, Angola, Zambia, and Zimbabwe - into one huge international conservation zone.

“But with the recent resurgence in poaching,” he says, “elephant movements have become very limited. They’re not crossing international boundaries as frequently as they did five years ago. The elephants have simply moved out and sought the safety and security of Botswana.”

Chase is also concerned that the fragile Okavango Delta won’t be able to sustain the large numbers of elephants that have moved in. Longtime Botswana ecologist Larry Patterson, who works with EWB as a vet, says there were very few elephants in the Okavango Delta in the 1970s. But now, with the population growing fast, he says they’re changing the delta’s ecology.

Given the impact of large numbers of elephants on both land and people, the Great Elephant Census comes at a critical time.  “This is an extremely important leg of the census,” Chase says. “There’s a lot of pressure on us to get it right. We’ve kicked off the survey by studying the marginal areas around the delta and still have much of northern Botswana to cover.” He expects the full results of the Okavango survey to be released in mid-2015.