Running for life 

ADVERTISEMENTWatch ‘Ringer’ every Monday to Friday at 9 pm on Big CBS Love. After witnessing a mob commit murder, a young woman Bridget (Sarah Michelle Gellar) is on the run. Fearing her life, she flees to New York to meet her estranged twin sister who soon after, commits suicide. She then poses as her wealthy twin sister to try and evade the mob but soon discovers that her sister has a price on her head as well.

In the episode to be aired on April 18, Bridget visits some of the last locations Siobhan went to before she disappeared and discovers that Siobhan kept a secret office. Olivia finds out some information about Henry and blackmails him into introducing her to Gemma’s wealthy father Tim Arbogast. Meanwhile in Paris, Tyler struggles with a moral decision that could affect Siobhan and Andrew.

Close encounter

Join intrepid wildlife photographer and adventurer Austin Stevens as he takes on some of the most dangerous animals on the planet. In each episode, viewers will witness wildlife photography at its most intense as Austin gets up close and personal with animal aggressors. ‘Austin Steven Most Dangerous’ airs on April 18 at 11 pm on Animal Planet

Broken promises         Kya Huaa Tera Vaada airs on Sony Entertainment Television on April 18 at 10 pm. Sweet story, fresh emotions and now a shocking revelation is all set to take the serial on a dramatic high. Finally, after a lot of hide and seek, the cat is out of the bag. What will Pawan’s father say to him? Will it be about leaving Anushka’s company?

String of lies  
HBO presents ‘Liar Liar’ on April 18 at 11.15 pm. The movie stars Jim Carrey, Maura Tierney and Cary Elwes. Get those hankies out to wipe away your tears of laughter. Ace comedian Jim Carrey is back as a career-obsessed lawyer and divorced father Fletcher Reed. His son (Justin Cooper) lives with Fletcher’s ex-wife Audrey (Maura Tierney). Poor Max longs to spend time with his dad but Fletcher is too busy and forgetful to fulfill his son’s wish. When Fletcher misses Max’s fifth birthday, Max takes drastic measures and wishes that his father could refrain from lying for an entire day. His birthday wish comes true and causes a 24-hour long nightmare for his father. 

Battle of the chefs  
Zee Cafe presents ‘Top Chef Masters’ on April 18 at 7.30 pm. ‘Top Chef Masters’ will pit 24 world-renowned chefs against each other and see how well they fare in the tried and tested format of the show.  In each episode, money will be at stake for the chefs, with the winners of eliminations being awarded cash donations for their charities. Big names like Wylie Dufrense, Rick Bayless and Hubert Keller feature on this season of the highly successful cook off show. 

A risky game 

Watch ‘Life On The Line’ on April 18 at 9.30 pm on Discovery Science.  It’s bushfire season in New Mexico and Santa Fe Fire Department is stretched to its limit. It desperately needs a new, custom-built firetruck to combat the bushfires threatening the city. Pierce Manufacturing in Appleton, Wisconsin must get a brand new truck to Santa Fe in record time or lives in New Mexico could be in danger.  But Pierce’s crew faces a tough fight to get the truck out of the door on time. Faulty parts burnout. Complex electronics malfunction. Client changes cause chaos. Can Pierce turn around their tightest order ever or will their New Mexico deadline go up in smoke?

(TV show timings are subject to change)