It is not only just the Ulsoor Lake which is polluted. According to a report released by Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) of the 75 lakes, studied in the City, 35 fall under E-Category, which means, the water is not fit for consumption, bathing and for animals. 

ADVERTISEMENTFollowing the findings of the report, KSPCB on March 15, 2016 sent a letter to Bangalore Development Authority, Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike, Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board and Lake Development Authority to ensure lakes get adequate protection. 

KSPCB chairman Lakshman told Deccan Herald that 35 lakes in the City are highly polluted and not fit for fishing also. The lakes are filled with sewage, industrial effluents and all types of pollutants. The stakeholders have been directed to take immediate measures since groundwater, especially in a one-kilometre radius of the lakes, is also highly polluted. There is no lake falling under A, B and C categories. 

Monthly assessments
The KSPCB had made monthly assessments of lakes from April 2015 to February 2016. The lakes were located across the City and the regional offices of Bommanahalli, City-West, Mahadevapura, Bengaluru City-East, Dasarahalli, Rajarajeshwari Nagar, Peenya, Yelahanka, Bengaluru City-South, Nelamangala, Hoskote and Sarjapur. 

Various categories
Some lakes which fell under E and Below E category throughout the assessment period were Kaikondarahalli, Bellandur, Agara, Varthur, Tubarahalli, Benniganahalli, Kundalahalli, Nallurahalli, Hoodigiddanakere, Garudacharpalya, Basavanapura, Rampura, Varthur Kodi, Puttenahalli, Sarakki, Doddakere, K Mallasandra and Bommasandra. 

Some of the important lakes  and their categories: Sankey Tank, Ulsoor, Dasarahalli, Jakkur, Yelahanka, Lalbagh and Yediyur lakes (all under ‘D’ category). Mahadevapura, Hulimavu and Dasarahalli lakes fall under the E category.
DH News Service

A- Drinking water source without conventional treatment but after disinfection
B- Outdoor bathing 
C- Drinking water source with conventional treatment followed by disinfection
D- Propagation of wildlife and fisheries
E- Irrigation, industrial cooling, controlled water disposal
Below E- Not meeting any of above categories.