Leopards are not only roaming freely in almost half of Karnataka, but breeding in human settlement as well, exposing the shortcomings of the Forest Department’s current strategy to capture and relocate the big cats. 

ADVERTISEMENTAnalysing more than 200 cases of man-leopard conflicts in Karnataka between May 2013 and April 2014, a team of wildlife researchers found 223 unique incidents in one year. Out of these, 19 cases involved presence of leopard cubs, which suggest these are not stray animals. A female with cubs is not going to be “straying” but to reside in that area because she needs to take care of her cubs. 

“This means these are not just straying animals, which is what the policymakers as well as much of the public believe it is,” wildlife researcher Vidya Athreya from Wildlife Conservation Society, Bengaluru, told Deccan Herald. The researchers found leopard presence across 84,000 square kilometre of area or roughly 47 per cent of Karnataka, excluding national parks and wildlife sanctuaries. The presence of the spotted cat was recorded in 68 out of the 175 taluks of Karnataka. 

Their presence is determined by the extent of vegetative cover — irrigated croplands, rocky escarpments and prey base in the form of feral and free-ranging dogs. Of the 56 cases of leopard removals reported in the media, 91 per cent cases did not involve human attacks, but followed killing of the livestock in many cases. 

Higher probabilities of attacks on livestock and human were associated with ecological features as well as with capture or removals of leopards, they reported in the November 12 issue of ‘One’, the journal of Public Library of Science. 

Media reports 

Instead of direct survey, the WCS researchers and their colleagues at Centre for Wildlife Studies, Bengaluru, used media reports to pick up leopard occurrence incidents and then applied scientific tools to analyse the pattern. 

“The only intervention that is carried out currently in response to public pressure to capture and release and no amount of capture will remove leopard presence, because either the vacant space is filled by a newcomer or the released animal comes back. Worse still, as seen in Maharashtra when you start doing a lot of it, then attacks on people occur near the release sites,” said Athreya.