A rescued bear has given birth to a cub at the Bannerghatta Bear Rescue Centre (BBRC) here.

ADVERTISEMENTThis comes as a piece of good news after 32 sloth bears died of tuberculosis and other infections in 2013-2014. 

The four-week-old cub was born to Kavi, a seven-year-old dancing bear rescued by Wildlife SOS from Gadag district in 2008.  

The male dancing bears rescued from the kalandars and sheltered at the BBRC are usually castrated. 

The birth of this bear cub was the result of mating that may have occurred when a wild male sloth bear from the Bannerghatta National Park breached the moat and entered the bear safari, said Kartick Satyanarayan, co-founder, Wildlife SOS. 

“Camera traps installed close to the rescue centres in the safari area confirmed the presence of wild male sloth bears in the Bannerghatta National Park area,” he added.

Dr Arun A Sha, wildlife vet and incharge of the BBRC, said that they were not aware about Kavi’s pregnancy till the birth of the cub. “The mother bear has kept the cub in a cave and the presence of the cub was known only when she ventured out for food. We are currently gathering data on the maternal care behaviour using camera traps and observations data to document this behaviour for scientific purpose to learn more about ecology of this particular bear species which is the least studied in the world,” he said.

Range Gowda, executive director, Bannerghatta Biological Park, said that it was good news indeed that an endangered species like the sloth bear had given birth in captivity. 
“After several years of rehabilitation efforts at the BBRC, it is good to observe that bears are now displaying natural behaviour,” Gowda said.

Wildlife SOS is currently undertaking a statewide survey on human-bear conflicts by gathering data using camera traps. “The sloth bear is threatened by shrinking habitat cover, habitat fragmentation and change in land use which has increased incidents of human-bear conflicts in recent times. In the past one year, the NGO, along with the Forest department, has managed to rescue nine sloth bears from conflict situations in Bengaluru and Tumakuru areas,” Satyanarayan said.