Namma Sangha, an organisation formed by photographers of international repute, Krupakar and Senani, with the support of the then DCF Yathish Kumar, started two LPG agencies in the Bandipur region. Consequently, people have stopped collecting firewood from the forest, reports Shashidhara Gargeshwari

This is the story of a decade ago. A time when people living in villages bordering the forest made frequent trips to the Bandipur National Park to collect firewood. The forest was under constant pressure from intruders looking to make away with its wealth. This also made a huge impact on the balance of the forest ecosystem. 

People who forayed into the forest faced the constant danger of wildlife attacking them. The herbivores in the forest had depleting resources to forage on. The decline in the number of herbivores started to make an impact on the other carnivorous species.

It was at such a point in time that photographers of international repute, Krupakar and Senani, had taken up wildlife research. D Yathish Kumar was the then  Deputy Conservator of Forests. The three of them got together and formed a team of like-minded people in an effort to solve the problem of firewood.

They conducted a research in over 190 villages on the borders of the forest reserve to understand the magnitude of the problem. And then came a shocking revelation, that 3.5 lakh kg of firewood was being burnt. Not that all this firewood was being used only by those living in the fringe villages. Some of it was also being sold in neighbouring towns and villages. 

The trio decided to form a group called ‘Namma Sangha’ to address the situation. The group realised that a solution to the firewood problem was to provide LPG to dwellers in the villages on the fringes of the forest. ADVERTISEMENTThe members of the group pitched in with the requisite funds initially. Friends, villagers and even school children pitched in. They then approached the Indian Oil Corporation and applied for two agencies. While the ‘Namma Sangha Indane Agency’ was formed at Melukamanahalli near Bandipur in May, 2004, the Bandipur Indane Agency was formed at B Matakere in March 2005. 

To draw people, Namma Sangha distributed free gas stoves initially. The National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) also joined hands, and as many as 16,600 consumers were provided free stoves. And yet, the response to the initiative was poor. 

A lot of villagers were apprehensive about using gas cylinders because of leaks, and other accidents. Also, there was the problem of terrain. Negotiating the Bandipur landscape was not too easy. As a result, the agency ran under a loss in the beginning. 

But Namma Sangha continued with it work. Slowly, after seeing the benefits of using LPG from neighbours and fellow villagers, a lot of people became more open to the idea of opting for LPG connections. Today, Namma Sangha has 32,000 consumers in 190 villages. As many as 1,570 consumers also have a double-cylinder facility now. There are 24 staff members of the agency, and this initiative by Namma Sangha has also provided a livelihood for their families.


AIDING FOREST CONSERVATION

Namma Sangha was not formed with the idea of making profits with the help of government grants or foreign funding. It was formed to help villages on the borders of the forest reserve, and also to conserve forest resources, says Green Oscar winner Krupakar.

 “It is true that Namma Sangha incurred losses for the first seven years. It is also true that a lot of people were scared of using LPG. But this organisation was formed with the love and contribution of school-going children who gave us whatever little money they had. There were fears that the organisation would shut shop,” he explains. 

“A similar exercise was started in Rajasthan’s Ranthambore with foreign funding. But in two years, the whole project crumbled. Then there is the example of Rajaji National Park in Uttarakhand. That too failed. Even the World Bank-aided project at Bandipur in 1999 failed. Many people tried to point to us all these failures and discouraged us. But things truly changed later,” he explains.

n P Suresh, an M Com degree holder, has been running the two agencies in an able manner. The dependence of locals on forest produce has come down following the setting up of the agencies. 

It is clear that 85 per cent of people have completely stopped going to the forest for fuel, he points out. When the agency was first formed, the consumer was required to make a deposit of Rs 750 per cylinder. There were a lot of people in rural areas who couldn’t afford to pay so much. We therefore took the help of women’s self-help groups. The groups deposited money on behalf of the consumers and then recovered the same from them in installments,” Suresh explains.

 “Bommanahalli and Kundakere villages are 35-40 km from Melukamanahalli. There are no roads there. And yet, we go to these villages to supply cylinders. There were times when people didn’t even know what their consumer number is. Today, that problem has been solved. 

Also, there are other problems such as weak mobile signals, or the fear of the neighbouring state’s tower catching signals that deter people from booking cylinders. We have facilities where we provide on-the-spot refills. We send extra cylinders too. Six hundred cylinders are distributed in a day,” Suresh says.