With a sweltering summer on the threshold, Bengalureans are eager to get packing. Idyllic beaches, trekking adventures, wildlife tours and culinary trails, the possibilities are immense. 

With airfare and hotel prices set to rise, they are trying to get the best deal without breaking the bank. Tour companies and adventure groups while pointing out how holiday-goers are exploring newer destinations, spell out whats ticking and what’s not!

By all accounts, summer holidays are the perfect time to revisit childhood. Keeping that in mind, ‘F5 Escapes’, a Bangalore-based, alternate travel company, which specialises in designing and executing all-women travel experiences, is holding a ‘Mom and Kids’ Trip’ to Coorg this summer. 

Explaining the concept, Malini, founder and chief travel officer, says “As children, we have all chased fireflies. There was a certain magic in those quick, shining flickering lights in the dark. Of course, with time, glaring neon lights took over our night sky. With the concept ‘Chasing the fireflies in Coorg’, moms and kids will have the opportunity to explore the rainforests of Coorg. We help relive the childhood and watch the fireflies. It is also an occasion to learn about organic cultivation and solar living. We are organising the trip on April 23 and 24. Apart from that, we are also planning day trips in May.”

For the wanderlust-struck, any chance to get away from the cacophony is a winning deal. Across the country, the options are unlimited with every nook and corner having a story to tell and every nondescript hamlet something to offer. Himachal Pradesh has been high on the list of Bengalureans for some time now, be it for adventure or for the serene locale. 

“When it comes to domestic travel, Kashmir has bounced back this year to be the top trending destination for domestic travel followed by Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim and Ladakh,” informs Karan Anand, head, relationships, Cox & Kings.  As far as overseas destinations are concerned, “Switzerland and France continue to be hot favourites this summer. A new addition this year is Russia whereas Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Hong Kong and Macau are the most popular destinations in Southeast Asia among Indian travellers. Cambodia, Philippines, Vietnam and Bali are offbeat lovers’ paradise,” he adds.  Planning a vacation is no easy task, but for the many nomads in the city, an escape from the city has  become inevitable. In fact they are happily infected by the travel bug.

“Summer has always been a popular time to travel amongst many Indians,”  points out Ravish Doctor, manager- growth strategy, Skyscanner India. “Be it for a long weekend or an extended holiday, we have witnessed an increase in the number of travellers making the most of the holidays during the summer,” he says.

“From Bengaluru, there has been a steady rise in search for destinations within Southeast Asia. Much like the majority of Indians, travellers from Bengaluru also favour summer travel to more popular destinations such as Bangkok, Singapore, Bali and Kuala Lumpur. 

While across the country, London and Paris continue to be the most searched destinations in Europe; in spite of the soaring temperatures, Dubai is emerging as a destination.  This may be attributed to Dubai as an all-round family destination which makes it perfect for children during their summer vacations,” he says. In spite of the recent happenings in Europe, surprisingly, there is still a sizable chunk who wants to explore its picturesque locales. “Europe is the perfect holiday destination for Indian travellers who want to escape the summer heat and we are observing an upward trend for this destination. While, destinations such as France, UK, Ireland, Switzerland and Italy continue to be favourites, there are many small regions within these countries that are getting very popular such as Charmonix in France,’’ adds Karan. Clearly, this summer seems to hold plenty of choices and surprises.