February 1996: In a glitzy pharmaceutical store in Chinatown, Vancouver, neatly stacked on shelves were products that shocked me. From tiger bone plasters and pills to powder and tonic to bear pile tonic, most of them labelled only in Chinese.

 Those were the days when the sale of products made from endangered species like the tiger was not taken very seriously in the West. But, tigers were being pushed towards the brink in many of its range countries largely due to poaching of the species for the Southeast Asian traditional medicine market. 

September 2012: One of the leading wildlife conservation organisations announced that ‘4 leopards a week enter India’s illegal wildlife trade’. It truly caused an uproar as the popular belief was ‘all is well’ with the leopards in India. 

That’s the drastic effect poaching can have on a wildlife species. Around the world, poaching has become a serious threat to the existence of several species. Large charismatic species such as tigers, elephants, rhinos, gorillas and chimpanzees, to lesser-known species such as pangolins, otters, and turtles are all illegally hunted for 2 reasons — trade of body parts or for the dinner plate. The list of species that scale up the barometer of the International Union for Conservation of Nature’s (IUCN) threat ruler, (extinct, critically endangered, endangered and so on), an internationally accepted index to gauge risk levels to wildlife species, is perhaps increasing with poaching being an important driver.

Today, illicit trade in wildlife is estimated to be worth US $17 billion per year and ranks 4th on the international crime list after drug trafficking, illegal arms trade and human trafficking. Wildlife products fetch top dollars. For instance, rhino horns fetch twice the value of gold. One of the main commercial markets is the use of wildlife products for their alleged medicinal properties, largely from Southeast Asia, with China being the biggest consumer. Unfortunately, Chinese also eat the greatest diversity of wild beasts, and as a Chinese joke goes — “In China, people eat everything on 4 legs, except tables”. This they call as the ‘open-minded’ attitude towards food. China has the capability to eat out the world’s biodiversity to extinction.

However, poaching of many wildlife species does not receive the attention as with regards to large charismatic species. The recent example includes a lesser-known species — the pangolin. There is large-scale concern over the species’s decline, hunted both for body parts and for its meat (http://www.pangolinsg.org).

Poaching has the capacity to lead species to total or regional extinction. Several wildlife species, both large and small, have blinked out of the earth’s face due to poaching. Cambodia recently announced the local extinction of tigers from the country. Tigers have now seen ecological extinction in 3 of the 13 range countries, all largely attributed to both direct poaching of the striped cat and its prey species. Within India, tigers went locally extinct in Sariska and Panna tiger reserves due to the handiwork of poachers. At the dawn of our Independence, we lost all our cheetahs largely due to sport hunting. 

Recent research by Andrew Jacobson, a researcher from the Imperial College, London, shows leopards, a once widely distributed felid, have now blinked out of nearly three-fourths of its historic range, again poaching contributing heavily to this range contraction. Hence, even a species that once spread far and wide now faces severe problems. 

Once upon a forest

Poaching does not affect animals alone; losing wildlife species can affect the entire forest ecosystem as many of them play a critical role in the forest environment. Species such as elephants, deer, birds and other frugivores help regenerate forests by dispersing the seeds of fruits they eat via spitting them or passing off in their faeces far and wide. Scientific evidence shows that the floral species composition and diversity changes drastically in forests that suffer poaching pressures. 

Regrettably, wildlife that act as dispersers are also the species that are targeted widely for the pot. In the Indian context, sambar, chital, barking deer, 4-horned antelope, chinkara, primates and hornbills are the main targets of poachers and they are also the key dispersers of many plant species. The forests become ecologically less functional once the wildlife disappears. Kent Redford, an American conservationist, coined the term ‘empty forests’, putting the entire concept behind these 2 hard-hitting words. It was for forests that looked ‘nice and fine’, but had very little life underneath the canopy, mostly due to poaching. This term is now widely used in wildlife conservation and research circles to depict the health of forests. 

Even within the population of a species, poaching of key individuals can disrupt social structures, demography, social dynamics and genetic diversity. Old bull elephants with long tusks, which are heavily targeted by poachers, could possibly be best ‘breeders’, and poaching them out could compromise the genetic future of the population. Similarly, breeding female tigers are extremely critical to sustain annual losses (from mortality and emigration) in tiger population. 

Poaching has other indirect effects, too. Money raised through poaching supports insurgency, terrorism, money laundering and other similar international threats. Poaching fosters corruption as well. 

Search for solutions

Some have proclaimed that technology can wipe out wildlife poaching altogether. Warfare technology, cheaper sensors and such other engineering advances, and industrial solutions are seen as an answer to control poaching. Drones that fly over forests to detect illegal logging, or orangutan nests, to hidden metal detectors that send out alerts to the nearest guard posts when someone walks near them with a metal object are seen as modern answers to reduce the threat of poaching. Though these solutions are innovative and attractive, they have seen limited use till date. The remoteness of the areas where wildlife occurs, weather, scalability, technological limitations such as battery life, cost and other drawbacks have limited the use of such technology. Quantitative evaluation of sustained, long-term success can make these ideas better acceptable. 

Colour dyeing of elephant tusks and rhino horns, spiking rhino horns with veterinary drugs that could cause severe sickness in the consumer, dehorning rhinos, micro-chipping rhino horns to help track them — these are ideas that are innovative but unviable in the field. 

In many countries across the world, wildlife hunting is an accepted social phenomenon, and the hunting of certain wildlife species is legal, putting a lot of pressure on certain wildlife species. 

A politically charged activity that aims to raise the revenue for wildlife conservation is another form of legal hunting, broadly termed trophy hunting. However, trophy hunting of endangered species has been one of the most controversial topics of wildlife conservation due to the hidden consequences of trophy hunting. But in India, poaching of any wildlife species (except when declared as vermin) is illegal, perhaps making us the only country in the world with such a strict legal framework against the killing of wild animals. 

For years, economists and some conservation biologists have promoted farmers raising and selling wildlife species so that it takes the pressure off wild animals. Such models have been tried on tigers, porcupines, bears, turtles and several other species. Nonetheless, scientific evidence suggests that commercial farming of wildlife is doing more harm than good. Wild-caught animals are laundered as ‘farm-bred individuals’. In addition, farming pushes up the price of wild-caught animals as many consumers prefer products from the wild versus animals that are raised in farms. A survey in China by Brain Gratwicke, a conservation biologist, about consumption of tiger body parts, disturbingly revealed that 71% of the interviewees who consumed tiger bone products preferred using tiger products from the wild compared to the ones raised in farms. Hence, farming seems unsustainable and could also locally extirpate even relatively common and fast breeding species, as seen with porcupines in Vietnam. 

Animals united

Poaching as an activity is carried out by 2  major groups — organised crime networks and loosely knit opportunistic groups or individuals. Wildlife faces grave consequences from all these groups and have to be dealt through appropriate means. It’s also an activity with low risk of detection and prosecution. Even in countries like India that have very strong laws against wildlife poaching, prosecution is minimal.

Protected areas in some countries like India, Nepal and some parts of Africa evidently have a positive effect on controlling poaching largely due to the hard work of frontline staff and effective leadership of forest departments. During our studies on leopards in Karnataka, most evidence we documented on poaching were in reserved forests, a legal category of forests, where the focus is largely on forestry and other sustainable use of resources. Here personnel do not carry out monitoring activities such as foot patrolling against poaching as done in protected areas.

Foot patrolling continues to be a key activity to control poaching as most of the times poaching is carried out by means that technology also misses. Awareness and public information campaigns can have some effect on reducing poaching pressures, but has a longer gestation period, and is difficult to measure its impact and desired results. 

Walking in the forests is always exciting, but we often get distracted by the scene of poaching evidence. Though the proportionate scale of poaching in India is lower compared to its Southeast Asian or some African counterparts, lowering the guard can lead to disastrous consequences as seen in Sariska and Panna tiger reserves. Concerted conservation action is needed, without which several of the world’s non-human life forms will leapfrog to extinction within a few decades, and wildlife biology will come to resemble paleontology.

(The author is a wildlife scientist)