Climate change and pollution are expected to worsen in the future. Therefore, it is essential to teach children to protect nature, so that they grow up to be responsible adults and adopt sustainable lifestyles.ADVERTISEMENTSince parents are the most influential people in children’s lives, you need to set the right examples for your children to follow. You have to raise them to be eco-sensitive. Remember, children do what they see.At the outset, start by practicing the three Rs of conservation: Reduce, Recycle and Reuse. With this, you can inculcate conservation values in your children.Waste management should begin at home. Always ensure to segregate waste at the source in order to reduce the waste that reaches the landfills. Keep two dustbins at home and involve children in segregating wet and dry waste. Start composting kitchen waste either at home or do it collectively as a community activity.To cultivate an interest in nature, involve them in nurturing plants at home. Window sills, balconies or terrace can be used to set up a kitchen garden. Along with your children, plant curry leaves, fenugreek, basil, spinach, chillies, tomatoes etc. in recycled containers, old jars, and plastic bottles.Responsible consumersTo lead a green lifestyle, the first criteria is to be responsible consumers. As far as possible replace plastic, thermocol and other artificial accessories with natural, biodegradable materials. During festive seasons, give eco-friendly gifts such as plants, reusable bags, and eco-friendly non-toxic toys.Teach children to value natural resources and save water and energy at home. Simple habits like turning off taps while brushing one’s teeth makes a difference in saving water.Also, use water-efficient aerators for taps and flushes. Water used to wash fruits and vegetables can be reused for gardening. Switch off appliances when not in use.Reuse cloth napkins instead of paper towels. Carry your own reusable bag, steel water bottle and steel tiffin and avoid using plastic glass, straws or water bottles.Children should join environmental clubs and get involved in beach cleaning, tree planting, animal welfare and conservation activities etc., that engage their sense, mind and emotions to develop interest in nature.Take children to plant nurseries, park, beach, farm and wildlife sanctuaries. Go stargazing, trekking, camping, and on a wild safari to nurture a love for nature.Environmental awarenessWhen we reinforce the importance of environment preservation in children, they will be conscious of the decisions they make. Environmental education should encourage critical thinking. It should go beyond textbook lessons and develop environment-friendly behaviour in children.Schools should have separate dustbins for segregation of waste at source, and discourage the use of plastics. Canteens should not have plastic cups, straws and glasses. Schools should hold workshops on kitchen gardening, urban farming and rainwater harvesting.Encourage students to participate in exhibitions, workshops, drama based on environment (air pollution, growing trees, saving endangered species and protecting rivers, etc.) to create awareness through fun-filled activities.Through various programmes, schools can help in developing environmentally informed citizens who contribute to create a healthy and greener environment.