Come summer and the annual migration begins. Stressed out city slickers abandon the sweltering heat of their metros to head out for cool climes and picturesque spaces where they can reconnect with nature and its abundant largesse. 

ADVERTISEMENTIn the days of the Raj, the British flocked to their ‘hill stations’ which still attract visitors long after they left India’s shores. Sadly, a few of the getaways that they created have been marred by rampant, unplanned development. Thankfully, a few have retained their pristine beauty. 

 India is an ideal summer holiday destination as it offers an amazing variety of options (some are featured below) that appeal to all tastes. Mountain resorts, beaches for those seeking the cliched sun, sand and surf; national parks with the promise of tiger sightings for wildlife enthusiasts; hidden Shangri Las trapped in a time warp... There is also one of the very few genuine car-free getaways where even battery-operated vehicles are not allowed. 

One of the advantages of an Indian summer holiday is that travelling is a cinch. The country has one of the most extensive railway networks in the world, and in recent years, modern airports have mushroomed around the country.

Sojha: Draped in yesterdays 

Lush fields of wheat, small highway towns and bustling hamlets whipped past us as our car bumped over rutted roads. Soon, forests of pine and cedar cast a green haze over the landscape and we were burrowing into an enchanting realm. 

Our driver braked to a stop at Jalori Pass (10,281 ft) which links Shimla and Kullu districts in Himachal Pradesh where a couple of lonely dhabas served tea and snacks, cooked over smoky wood fires. A hilltop Kali Mata temple cast a protective shadow over the serene scene... Our destination, the village of Sojha, was just 5 km away.

When we arrived at the cosy Banjara Retreat and Cottage, we felt like we had travelled way back, to an innocent time when a beautiful life devoid of discord was a given. For, Sojha has a muffled, almost unreal, quality about it, we discovered, as we gazed at one of the most beauteous scenes in the world that unfurled beyond the windows of our wood-panelled room.

It was late afternoon, and mist and clouds drifted across the horizon like the gossamer wings of fairies. In contrast was the rugged appeal of the Dhauladhar range of the Himalayas that heaved in the distance, snow-clad and inaccessible. 

On our first morning, we embarked on a trek to a waterfall embedded in a forest. Initially, we strolled down the sole village road. Indeed, Sojha is the last village in the Seraj valley, 90 km from Shimla and is, in a way, as remote as you can get! 

A shepherdess with a flock of goats sauntered past and stopped willingly to pose for our cameras. Another with a flock of sheep was equally willing — both had a certain unvarnished innocence and radiance, rarely visible in today’s materialistic world.

Beauty of a different kind was on full-on display in a coniferous forest of soaring pines, blue pines, cedar and fir trees. There we walked along a red path carpeted with pine needles, listening to bird songs that filtered down from the green canopy.

Was this world for real? We wondered as we reached the cascade. In Sojha, the lines between reality and fantasy get blurred.

Contact: Himachal Pradesh Tourism; himachaltourism.gov.in

Tawang: Shangri La rediscovered

On the road to Tawang, in the north-eastern reaches of the country in Arunachal Pradesh, the primeval landscape speaks powerfully to the traveller — of journeys undertaken in the past; of footprints left behind by other explorers, and of how time has snuck past, without leaving behind any ugly imprints on the landscape. 

Standing at Sela Pass, the second highest motorable pass in the world at 14,000 ft, we felt like going down on bended knee to acknowledge nature’s might and power. A glowing pastiche of mountains, forests and a river, the pass reminded us of our fragility and mortality.

We had stopped innumerable times along the serpentine mountain roads to gaze at a rushing green river; at rustic homes perched on giddy ledges; yaks with rapier-like horns that ambled past like they had all the time in the world; local Monpa tribals sporting wigs made of yak wool to stave off snow and ice...

We reached Tawang at dusk, when the mountain town was painted in mystical hues. The next morning, we hastened to see the legendary hill top 17th century Tawang monastery where shaven head monks spun prayer wheels and seemed to have retreated into an inner world. An 8-ft-high gilded statue of the Buddha keeps eternal vigil over the 500 lamas as their chants seem to soar into the blue sky in what is said to be the largest Buddhist monastery complex in India.

After browsing the colourful little marketplace, we set off to explore the Lake District near the China/Tibet border. There jade-green lakes shimmered in the icy grip of the mountains. A setting sun set the world on fire; the world seemed huge, ancient, unknowable... The land whispered its secrets to the wind which we could neither understand nor decipher. In Tawang, it did not matter.

Contact: Arunachal Tourism; www.arunachaltourism.com

Ranikhet: A whiff of nostalgia

Ranikhet has the magical quality that comes from being smudged with nostalgia. Many a summer vacation in our childhood happened there when it was de rigueur to wake up at the crack of dawn to catch the sun and gaze at its gold beams spread over the Himalayas like honey.

We returned to the hill resort in Uttarakhand after decades, only to discover that Ranikhet had aged yet retained some pockets of loveliness from its prime. We could not locate the guest house owned and run by an Anglo Indian lady of ample girth, for some modern but not very pretty developments have erased the Ranikhet that we once knew.

But a walk in a deodar forest brought back memories in a scented rush — of similar strolls into the depths of a green woodland; of encountering bristling-moustache-colonel-types walking their dogs (Nainital is the Regimental Centre for the Kumaon Regiment); and silver-haired ladies with gentle smiles gossiping over the fence that separated colonial cottages. It was a gentle, humane life where neighbours became friends for life. 

The hushed cathedral-like silence of the forest and the mystique of the distant Himalayas contrast with the buzz of the bazaar crammed with local souvenirs and woollen apparel. Browse in the bazaar, hike in the hills, tee off at the Ranikhet Golf Course, check out some of the colonial bungalows, plug into nature... There are simple pleasures aplenty.

The spirit of the Kumaoni queen, Rani Padmini, who is said to have discovered Ranikhet, still lives in this charming precinct. Rani Padmini was enchanted with the mountains and the green valleys surrounding this tiny hamlet when she stumbled on it by accident. She then requested her king to build her a palace there. They named it Ranikhet or Queen’s Meadow. The palace has vanished but Ranikhet continues to draw holidaymakers in search of stupendous views of the Himalayas and a chilled-out escape. 

Contact: Kumaon Tourism, an arm of Uttarakhand Tourism; www.kmvn.gov.in 

Matheran: Car(e)-free

Matheran is India’s first and only car-free hill station and justifiably wears its status like a badge of pride. Walking is a joy in this 7.35-sq-km getaway where red earth trails lead to picturesque look-out points with mini Grand Canyon-like views of the Sahyadris in Maharashtra. 

One of the joys of travelling there for us is by toy train from Neral, feeling the cool mountain breeze waft across our faces as the doughty little train puffs up the slopes self-importantly. A less romantic way is to take a taxi from Neral or drive up and park your car at Dasturi, 2 km from the hill town’s centre.

Everything about Matheran is small, compact and lovable — its pretty colonial bungalows; minuscule Charlotte Lake and evocatively named vantage points — Lousia Point, Echo Point, One Tree Hill, Monkey Point... The latter is named after Matheran’s permanent residents who swing and perch on the green canopy of the forest and run across the corrugated tin roofs of the old-world hotels. That sound, akin to a low drumming, is as much a part of Matheran’s charm as the all-pervasive smell of horse flesh. (This is no one-horse town — there are close to 400 horses for vacationers to ride!)

Newer doodads like the glitzy hotels with their video game parlours et al may lure the young fun seeker, but for us, long-time Matheran lovers, the hill station’s allure is best-experienced in its vintage colonial-style hotels and during the week. This is when day-trippers beat a retreat and we feel ensconced in the hill town’s green heart.

Much like it was when Hugh Malet, the collector of Thane, discovered the hilltop forest in 1850 which the locals called Mathe-ran or forest on top of a mountain. For many of us, born and raised in Mumbai, Matheran is a rite of passage. 

Contact: Maharashtra Tourism; www.maharashtratourism.gov.in

Kovalam: Life’s a beach

Kovalam is buried in the collective unconscious of the world as India’s fun, sun and surf beach hideaway... somewhat like Goa. Once rated as one of the 10 best beaches in the world, thanks to its gin-clear waters and a milkshake surf lapping champagne-coloured sands, Kovalam today has a gaggle of cafes, swish hotels, tattoo parlours, quick-fix massage parlours for backaches, shacks with pretensions of being schools for yoga and what-have-you lining its three beaches.

But the beach resort’s real charm lies in its quiet rustic appeal — watching fishermen push out to sea in their country craft to get the fresh catch of the day; sari-clad women who stroll on the beach hawking everything from sunglasses to pineapple slices; beach shacks fragrant with the aroma of local cuisine; a scattering of fishing boats draped in fishing nets resembling beached whales resting in the shade of leaning palms; the sight of locals and foreign tourists meditating on their navels under colourful beach umbrellas or poised in yogic asanas...

It is easy to get one’s bearings in Kovalam which comprise three small crescent-shaped beaches, separated by large rocky outcrops extending into the sea. Hawa beach is dominated by budget hotels and shacks with zany names like Beatles, Food and Music Café, Chinnu’s Nest etc. Vizhinjam mosque beach lies in the middle and this is where fishermen anchor their craft. Beyond it stretches Samudra Beach and a palm-fringed lagoon which marks the end of Kovalam’s backwaters. A cruise down this luminous waterway with its scattering of villages and pealing church and temple bells was both relaxing and scenic. 

One of our most indelible memories of Kovalam is savouring a beach barbecue under a star-spangled sky. The relentless pounding of the surf, an unchained melody, mingled with the strumming of guitars by strolling musicians. It was a beach idyll to remember!
Contact: Kerala Tourism; 
www.keralatourism.org

Corbett: Tiger! Tiger!

The silence bristled with possibilities. Somewhere in the dense forest of Jim Corbett National Park a tiger lurked. Suddenly the stillness exploded with the sharp alarm call of a deer which quivered over the foothills of the Himalayas in Uttarakhand. His cover blown, the striped feline emerged from a thicket and snarled his displeasure at us before melting into the forest once more. 

With the tiger sighting behind us, we could now enjoy our elephant safari and the other surprises that Corbett had in store for us: an adolescent tusker who lumbered away rather comically to join the rest of his herd; the grace of spotted deer; a twitchy sambar fawn who gazed at us with child-like curiosity; a jackal scurrying across a log bridge that spanned a silvery-blue stream... Later that evening, on a jeep safari, we were rewarded with the sighting of a rare yellow-throated marten...

And the song of birds filled the air. Even if there were no tigers, or for that matter any other animals, Corbett would rank as one of the best birding destinations in the country with over 550 species of nesting birds.   

However, the 520-sq-km wilds, criss-crossed by gushing and emerald rivers, is original tiger country for it was the first national park to be established in India in 1936, and later the launching pad of Project Tiger in 1973. Currently, Corbett is believed to have amongst the highest concentration of big cats in the world.

Though there is more to Corbett than tigers, the striped feline strides across the imagination of visitors like an all-consuming predator. It’s the prized sighting that all seek; it’s what makes a wildlife safari all the more exciting... never knowing when it will reward a chosen few with its majestic presence.   

Contact: Garhwal Tourism, an arm of Uttarakhand Tourism; www.gmvnl.com