However, the four-horned deer, a rarest species of antelopes, have reached the brink of extinction.

Known to be a treasure-house of medicinal herbs, the forest covers an area of 7,800 hectares. Bears, leopards, foxes, rabbits and wolves are found commonly here besides four-horned deer.

The State Wildlife Conservation Division had proposed to the government to declare the forest as four-horned deer sanctuary. 

The matter was discussed in a meeting held on August 11, 2010, chaired by the then chief minister B S Yeddyurappa. In the beginning of 2011, the State government had sent an official order recognising Rangayyana Durga as four-horned deer sanctuary for conservation of the animal.

Now, almost an year later, it has not taken the next steps to protect the deer by passing the order to the Wildlife Conservation Division.

The government had agreed to grant Rs five lakh in two phases to protect the water bodies in the area and the habitat of the deer. So far, the money has not been utilised.

Unlicensed cutting of the trees in the forest and hunting of the deer continue unabated in Rangayyana Durga which has been condemned to oblivion. The forest guards, however, are conspicuously absent during such incidents.

‘Violation of Act’

Sanjay Gubbi, a member of the State Wildlife Advisory Board, said the four-horned deer was one of the rarest species found in the world. “The State government, has not handed over the order to the Wildlife Conservation Division thus violating the Wildlife Protection Act 1972.”

He added that Black Buck Sanctuary in Ranebennur in Haveri district and Daroji Bear Sanctuary in Bellary were managed well by Wildlife Conservation Division.

“Declaration of a sanctuary does not prevent unnecessary movement of people in the forest area. The government has specified matters only regarding conservation of four-horned deer and development of the forest area. There are no prohibitions on the tribals living in the forest limits. Therefore, there are no prohibitions on people,” Gubbi explained and added that the government needed to take steps in this regard.

‘Plan soon’

Shivashankara Murthy, district forest officer told Deccan Herald, that Rangayyana Durga forest area was within their purview. 

Therefore, the orders cannot be passed to the Wildlife Conservation Division. 

“After receiving the orders from the government, conservation plans will be prepared by December-end and handed to the Government. We shall undertake the development work once the Government readies the action plan,” he added.ADVERTISEMENT