In search of a treasure

ADVERTISEMENTDirected by Prachya Pinkaew, Ong Bak airs on July 6 at 9 pm on Star Movies. This action-adventure, which has a healthy dose of crime, follows the life of Boonting, played by Phanom Yeeram. 

He lives in Ban Nong Pradu, which is a small, peaceful village. However, one day, the sacred Buddha statuette called Ong Bak is stolen from the village by an immoral businessman, who ends up selling it for an exorbitant price. 

Boonting tries to track the thief down to Bangkok to reclaim the treasure, using his 
traditional Muay Thai skills to combat his adversaries. Catch the movie for a thrilling experience with a healthy dose of martial-art moves.


When things get intense

The much-awaited eighth season of ‘Deadliest Catch’ (Season 8) airs on July 6 on the Discovery Channel at 6 pm. This show highlights some intense action and adventure — on the ice. 

As a polar ice pack invades the Opilio crab grounds, forcing the captains to make a decision: they can either grab their gear and run for their lives, or be braver and keep fishing, making every attempt to fight their foes.

 In the course of this escapade, two deckhands fall victim to an ice assault and the captain’s troubles are simply compounded by a call from home.

The butcher is back

Scream 3’, the third installment of the popular ‘Scream’ franchise, witnesses a murdering spree which begins to happen again — this time around, during the production of ‘Stab 3’ in Hollywood, California. 

With the killer targetting the remaining Woodsboro survivors and the actors of ‘Stab 3’ as well, Sydney must face the demons of her past — at the same time, discovering an unknown part of it? 

How will she combat all these evils? Tune in to ‘Scream 3’, which also stars David Arquette, Neve Campbell, Courtney Cox-Arquette, Patrick Dempsey, Jenny McCarthy, Parker Posey and Deon Richmond, to find out. It airs on HBO at 9 pm on July 6.

Cocooned in their own world

Any one looking for the perfect getaway is in for a treat — ‘Green Paradise’ airs on Discovery HD World at 9.30 pm on July 6. 

From Brazil to Sri Lanka, explore the most beautiful natural paradises in the world over the course of this show. 

Each episode will give viewers a chance to meet the inhabitants of these areas, who have developed small businesses to welcome visitors to their environment. 

Discover ten destinations around the world, where local economies successfully help to protect natural resources and wildlife diversity. 

Game show with a twist

101 Ways to Leave a Game Show’ airs on AXN at 7 pm on July 6. Based on Endemol’s successful worldwide format, ‘101 Ways to Leave a Game Show’ is practically the next generation of game shows. 

The show sees eight contestants compete to be the winner of a  whopping 10,000-pound prize, simply by picking the right answers to questions based on pure general knowledge. 

But there’s a twist — and quite an exciting one. Competitors who pick the wrong answers, on the other hand, are eliminated from the game in a variety of different way — usually involving a large drop into a pool of water.