The rampant felling of teak trees going on unabated in Bhadra Tiger Reserve Forest does not seem to be stopping at all. With the monsoon, the network of smugglers gets active and teak worth lakhs of rupees is fell and smuggled, especially during the rainy season.

ADVERTISEMENTEven this year, there are evidences of several teak trees being cut at Kakanahosodi, Chaudikatte and Umblebail of Haldare in Lakkavalli region. 

Last year, according to sources, 30 to 40 trees were cut in Muthodi region of Bhadra 
Reserve Forest. Later it was also learnt that Forest Department personnel were hand in gloves with the anti-social elements. Surprisingly, no action has been taken against the culprits from the department, despite District in-charge Minister Suresh Kumar ordering the Forest Department to punish the culprits.

This year too teak trees aged about 30 to 40 years have been cut down and there is anger from various quarters against the silence of forest department.Over 100 stumps can be seen at Haldare, Kakanahosodi, Chaudikatte region. The Wildlife Division personnel have been remaining silent citing that the region does not come under their jurisdiction.

However, Umblebail forest officer has booked cases and arrested five individuals with regard to felling of over 17 trees in Doddinathale area. Wildlife activists say that over the last one and half month the smugglers have been fearlessly felling trees while the forest officials are busy undertaking development work like laying roads, constructing tanks, digging wells and laying culverts in the forest area.

“The area where theft has taken place does not come in our limits. Hence we will conduct survey again and ascertain the same. The Bhadra Sub Division Officer has already visited and inspected the spot. Sub Divisional forest officer and Forest Guard has been 
suspended,” said Bhadra Wildlife Lakkavalli Range Officer Basavarajappa.

However State Chief Conservator of Forest (wildlife) Deepak Sharma said that he is not aware of any teakwood theft from the reserve forest area. “I will collect details on this issue and take appropriate action,” Sharma added.