Ganesh Majik and his son, Suryakant Majik, a civil defence service officer, were booked by the department capping year-old investigation in the first ever tiger killing case in Goa.
Nagesh Majik, Ankush Majik and Bhiva Gawas were also chargesheeted in this case, which was exposed by renowned environmentalist Rajendra Kerkar.

The tiger was put to death with two gun shots in Cashew plantation adjoining Keri village and later dragged few metres away and burnt allegedly to destroy the evidence.
A case under Arms Act for using unlicensed weapon to kill the tiger was also registered against the accused by forest department who have managed to seize only one out of two guns involved in the crime.

The chargesheet has named 15 witnesses including Kerkar in this case, which will be tried later this month in the local court.

The forest department has attached forensic report by Dehradun based Wildlife Institute of India (WII) to confirm that the remains of animal collected from the site were that of a tiger. 

"The sample of hair collected from the site matched during the forensic test," deputy conservator of forest, Dr G T Kumar, who supervised the investigations, told reporters.
He said that the department was informed about the killing through a newspaper report that appeared on April 13, 2009 in a national daily.

"Entire investigation began based on the photograph of tiger carcass published in the newspaper," he said.

The forest department officials found out that a local youth had clicked the photograph of tiger on his mobile while it was being killed. The photograph was circulated via Bluetooth to many mobile handsets and was even downloaded on the internet.

Kumar stated that the department had not been able to get the original mobile phone which was used to click the picture.
The entire case had received a setback after initial findings by WII had ruled out that the animal killed was a tiger.

Later, the final report was positive. "Preliminary report was based on morph meter which means the examinations are done by observing the samples," Kumar said.ADVERTISEMENT