The Sanjay Gandhi National Park (SGNP) in Mumbai is undergoing a major transformation and very soon it can boast of international standard facilities. Nightlife has been added to it.The SGNP offers  to visitors wildlife and nature. Besides, it has astronomical, archaeological and historical sites. It is actually a “city forest” – the only such national park in the world to be within the limits of a metropolitan city. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe SGNP has always been the perfect getaway destination for Mumbaikars in search of some respite from the chaos of this densely populated metropolis. But there is so much more to the park than a haven away from the noise. It is a breathing ecosystem with much to offer.

The SGNP is high on agenda of the Maharashtra government. In the budget, it has proposed development of integrated wildlife protected zone and tourism facilities of international standards similar to Masai Mara at the SGNP, Tadobha-Andhari Tiger Reserve and Gorewada Zoological Park. “Biodigester toilet, drinking water facilities will be provided to tourists on jungle safaris,” says the government.
“We want to make such a facility so that people can come here, stay, spend considerable time and appreciate nature,” according to Chief Conservator of Forests and SGNP Director Vikas Gupta. “We want people to see the real nightlife of Mumbai, appreciate the calls of birds, animals, and the ecology. We are offering what no other park would be able to offer,” Gupta told Deccan Herald.

“The SGNP was also discussed at the World Park Congress,” said Shardul Baji­kar, a conservationist, who is the Director of Adventure Sports and Beyond.The SGNP, spread over 103 sq km in Mumbai and some parts of neighbouring Palghar and Thane districts, is home to more than 274 species of birds, 35 species of mammals, 78 species of reptiles and amphibians, 170 species of butterflies, several species of fish and a staggering 1,300 species of plants. 
It has the highest leopard density and is home to at least 22 leopards.  
The highest peak of Mumbai, the Jambulmal is located here and so is the Kanheri caves, which  is a 2,000-year-old complex of some 160 rock-cut caves popularly known as the “Kanheri caves”, a protected archaeological site.

Constructed in the 19th century, the Vihar (1860) and Tulsi (1868) Lakes are located within the forests of the SGNP – and an important source of water for Mumbai.There is a proposal to add a leopard safari to the existing tiger safari and lion safari. The Central Zoo Authority has been approached for starting the leopard safari.“It’s a nature’s delight. What the SGNP is doing is great. It needs to be transfo­rmed and made into a world-class facility,” said Jayanta Narayan Saha, a photographer and Editor of NapolStockImage. “The flora and fauna here are unmatched and offer a lot to nature lovers,” he added.

Schedules

Vikas Gupta said: “We want people to spend time here, not just for a few hours, a day, but overnight. We are working our schedules and trips that would suit people of Mumbai or tourists.”Shilonda Trail, Malad Trail Line, Kanheri/Upper Trail, Bamboo Hut/Gaumukh Trail, Kashimira Trek and Nagla Block Trail offered here are unique.

During treks, visitors could come across small herds of spotted deer, a solitary sambar, a darting barking deer or black-naped hare. If they are lucky, they may come face to face with a leopard. The density of leopards is one of the highest for any such wilderness, which makes this encounter a very real possibility.

Sighting a porcupine, which is rare, or a palm civet, hardly seen these days or encountering a striped hyena can make it a memorable experience. The lucky few can possibly see the elusive four-horned antelope or the extremely shy mouse deer. 

The monkey species include the Rhesus macaque, which is an introduced species, the Bonnet macaque and the completely vegetarian Hanuman langur (leaf monkey). The Indian flying fox is the biggest of the 17 bat species found in the park. Also, the park is a bird watchers paradise. From the tiny Tickell’s Flowerpecker (small bird in India), many species of sunbirds (old world equivalent of the humming birds) to the majestic Whitebellied sea eagle it is a virtual visual feast for trekkers. The park is home to birds like the Paradise Flycatcher, the elusive Trogon, many species of Kingfishers, Woodpeckers and Drongos, Brown-headed Barbet and parakeets.

The reptilian world is well represented by crocodiles in Tulsi lake, monitor lizards, pythons, cobras, Russell's viper, Bamboo pit viper and the extremely rare Ceylonese cat snake recently discovered by the staff of the Bombay National History Society. 

Smaller reptiles add to the wonder of this park. The invertebrate world from crabs to spiders to insects, giant wood spiders, signature spiders, black wood spider with their large webs in monsoon is a treat to any naturalist. 
The insect world shows abundant 

variations in the form of silk cotton bugs, beetles and several kinds of mantis. The butterfly world is represented in a fascinating range of sizes and colours and the spectacular Blue Mormon, the phenomenal artist of camouflage the Blue Oak leaf, the bright Jezebels and Large Yellow and White Orange tips, Monarchs, Egg fly, Sailors are some of the many attractive butterflies one can find here.