Arefa Tehsin’s Iora and the Quest of Five is the fantasy story of one little girl’s mission to uncover a mysterious ‘Five’. ADVERTISEMENTThe author uses her knowledge of wildlife and rainforest lore to create a quasi-imaginary world of talking jungle animals and humans with a unique gift — the ability to converse with their plant and animal brethren.

A resident of the quirky realm of Twitterland, Iora is a happy-go-lucky child. Her brave and rather mysterious father, Heron, is an enigmatic and charismatic man, while her grandfather Cuckatoo is grumpy and dourly affectionate at the same time. When Heron leaves for an expedition, Iora’s escapades culminate in her being bitten by a Rogue Thorn Worm, and then she hears the unthinkable — someone wants Heron’s blood.

Following that revelation is Iora’s determined trample through the Wacky Wilderness to discover the whereabouts of the speakers, and in her quest to discover the truth, Iora learns that her father’s blood is only a part of the whole, and that there’s evil lurking in the rainforests, waiting to be unleashed.

On the face of it, Iora and the Quest of Five appears to have the elements of a typical quest fantasy. Iora’s overhearing of the menacing voices leads her on a journey beyond the confines of Twitterland, beyond the safe refuge she’s been used to so far. 

The so called ‘anti-natural’ forces threatening to destroy the very fabric of jungle stability is evil personified, attempting to destroy the natural order of things. In the Wacky Wilderness, appearances can be deceptive, and the animals and plants Iora encounters each have their own personality and views. Speaking in a common tongue called ‘Jungly’, that’s apparently lost to the civilised world, Iora and her companions meet new creatures and old acquaintances.

Iora herself could have been endearing. In some respects, she is as bright and cheerful as the songbird she’s named after, not to mention determined. Owlus, her bad-tempered rival, who manages to tag along with her for reasons known only to himself, is a pseudo-intellectual. Baba, the orangutan and guide, pretends to be deaf when he’s probably not. Then there’s Beetle, oddly dressed but intensely loyal.

However, the book has its share of anomalies. Though a few grammatical and punctuation errors would not mar reading pleasure, Iora and the Quest of Five is riddled with them on nearly every page. Expressions such as ‘Beetle had just lied down when an owl began to hoot loudly’, and ‘Does this shorty looks like a Twitter to you’, and ‘Daddy Long Legs was the silent kinds’ are only a few of them. 

Descriptions are often cluttered with far too many adjectives and unrelated sequences of events, diminishing the overall effect of the narrative.

 There’s also a reference to an Amazon holding a ‘knife with jagged teeth’, which does, of course, bring strange images to mind. The writing, at times, tends to be clunky and amateurish, with stilted dialogue and forced attempts at humour, and quotation marks left open. The entire novel reads, regrettably, like an unchecked draft. Evil is markedly, almost childishly evil, and Owlus’s persistent one-liners become jarring after a while. His rivalry with Iora is a very good idea on the surface, however, and their constant bickering is not atypical of children their age.

And, of course, there’s the slight problem of ‘fantasy’ in the story. Fantasy, as genre fiction, defines its best stories with adherence to reality in some form, and reality does not necessarily restrict itself to social issues and the failure of society in general. 

While magic, sorcery and mystical creatures, even the great evil that forms an antagonist, are staples of the genre, the ‘fantastic’ in any fantasy is created within limits. Remove those limits, and the suspension of disbelief falls flat. Iora and the Quest of Five moves dangerously towards the latter. 

While trying to present a real issue of threats to rainforests, the novel is cluttered with bizarre and fantastic creatures, hidden places, peculiar plants, and odd people, so much so that it detracts from the effectiveness of the narrative. Fantasy novels in general tend to be a lot more subtle, even those for young adults. 

Neither the Artemis Fowl books, nor Harry Potter, nor the Inheritance Cycle, or even the Thief Lord, detract from reality so much that the entire escapade becomes, well, weird.

Perhaps, if Iora and the Quest of Five had been better edited, with the rough edges in the writing smoothened out, the book would have read a lot better. It is hard to read a novel with glaring typographical errors and incorrect usages in the language along every page turn.

Oddly, less detail may have worked in the book’s favour. It could have been better.