To all those constant social media users who have an eye for wildlife photography, here are a few Instagram and Twitter accounts that you must follow.ADVERTISEMENT1. Rathika RamaswamyWith close to 45.6K followers on Instagram, Chennai-based Rathika Ramaswamy is considered one of India's foremost woman wildlife photographers. She specialises in the field of bird photography and has travelled to most national parks and sanctuaries across the country and also across Africa to document some of the rarest species of birds.She published her first photo book on bird photography which contains the best images of her collection. In 2014, she published a second photo book of her best wildlife moments named ‘The Best of Wildlife Moments’. She is one of the most commonly searched photographers on the web, according to xxlpix.com.Her Instagram account features some of the most vibrant pictures of birds and other wildlife:You can also follow her on Twitter, @RathikaRamasamy to catch up with updates on wildlife photography and her workshops.Here is Rathika's Women's day tweet:Happy international women’s day !
Sharmili -Tigress ,Bijarani zone,Corbett national park #HappyWomensDay2019 pic.twitter.com/8MITAxSe7y— Rathika Ramasamy (@RathikaRamasamy) March 8, 20192. Jayanth SharmaJayanth Sharma is a Bengaluru-based photographer and writer who has won several national and international wildlife photography awards. He is the CEO and co-founder of Toehold Travel and Photography Pvt Ltd. He took up to photography in 2004.In 2016, he won the Windland Smith Rice Award for Nature's Best Photography. Sharma is also known to have written travel photography articles for several news organisations.His photographs on Instagram are a combination of elements of nature and fine art. Here is one such image:Check out @Jayanth_Sharma 's mesmerising photographs on Twitter as well.A Chilean #Flamingo lands in one of the lakes of #Patagonia 's #TorresDelPaine National Park.
-#ToeholdPhotoTravel #travel #nature #wildlife #wildlifephotography #animals pic.twitter.com/zMWC0iioDV— Jayanth Sharma (@Jayanth_Sharma) March 8, 20193. Sandesh KadurSandesh Kadur is a Bengaluru-based wildlife film-maker and conservation photographer. He is widely known for his contributions to the BBC documentary Plant Earth II. His inspiration to become a wildlife photographer began when he was relatively young and when his father gifted him an SLR camera and a number of National Geographic films.He has studied in detail and conducted research on the biodiversity in India, Mexico and South America. Kadur is a graduate in wildlife biology from the University of Texas. His photographs have been showcased in various books and magazines, whereas his documentaries have been aired on channels such as National Geographic Channel, BBC, Discovery Channel and Animal Planet.Some of his notable works are Natural World, Wild India, Planet Earth II and National Geographic Earth Live. He has also published three books - Himalaya: Mountains of Life, El Valle: The Rio Grande Delta and Sahyadris: India's Western Ghats.Here is an amazing snap from his Instagram account.Don’t miss to check out @SandeshKadur's Twitter account as well.My #2018bestnine - https://t.co/LDNH23hlPD— Sandesh Kadur (@SandeshKadur) December 25, 20184. Sudhir ShivaramSudhir Shivaram, a native of Hassan (Karnataka), got interested in wildlife photography while pursuing engineering in Malnad College of Engineering. Shivaram was named "Wildlife Photographer of the Year" by Sanctuary Asia in 2012. He is a member of the Canon Professional Photographers Panel and also one of the founding members of India Nature Watch, a non-profit photo sharing site, along with Kalyan Verma.The award-winning photographer captures breathtaking and beautiful images of wild animals. Check out his spectacular photograph.You could also check out @SudhirShivaram's ‏Tweets to get more updates related to his online photography tutorials.Yo what are you doing up there!

Funny moments in wildlife...to capture these moments, you have to be fast, focused and not get distracted. You don't get them again.

As I say, in wildlife you get 0-3 seconds to make your images....or you have missed it.…https://t.co/BLhfSi8J8E— Sudhir Shivaram (@SudhirShivaram) January 6, 20195. AmoghavarshaAmoghavarsha a Bengaluru-based wildlife photographer and film-maker who is widely known for working with National Geographic and BBC. The recent film Wild Karnataka by Amoghavarsha is India's first blue-chip movie on the biodiversity in the State. It has gained the attention of many enthusiasts who are eagerly waiting for the film to telecast. Initially a software engineer by profession, he quit his job in 2008 to pursue wildlife photography.His Instagram account features many 'wow' images of flora and fauna from Kilimanjaro to Kudremukh. Here is a picture of a herd of Elephants with the mountain range adding a picturesque view in the backdrop.You can also follow @amoghavarsha on Twitter.And into the #forest I go to lose my mind and find my #soul - #johnmuir #wilderness #path #woods #shotoniphone pic.twitter.com/lN4zobBvRP— amoghavarsha Ⓥ (@amoghavarsha) December 11, 2018