Sarah Graham is a celebrated South African cook, food writer and a TV host today. 
Her  first TV series, Sarah Graham Cooks Cape Town, started in 2013, is now  being telecast in over 40 countries, and has even won a SAFTA (South  African Food and TV Award). Graham is now up with her next TV venture  Sarah Graham’s Food Safari, telecast on TLC channel. 

ADVERTISEMENTIn the series, Graham unlocks an entirely new repertoire of recipes that she cooks outdoors, throughout her adventures across exotic locations in Southern Africa. 
“South African cuisine is known for its indigenous and traditional cooking techniques. The simplicity in terms of ingredients, techniques and taste attracts me the most,” says Graham who has also authored three books — Bitten, Smitten and Home.

Travelling to 3 countries, within a period of 7 weeks, she explores the treasures of gourmet heritage across southern African countries like Zimbabwe, Zambia and South Africa. She will also be seen cooking at various remote places with breath-taking backdrops.

“This show is different from what I have done in the past. The best part of it is that I’ll be cooking outdoors. It’s not like the usual cooking which we do in everyday life. Surrounded by the nature and its beauty, the entire experience is going to be memorable,” Cape Town-based Graham tells Metrolife. 

But cooking outdoor has its own share of difficulties, points out Graham. She shares, “Cooking in open spaces was complicated and we had to shoot for 12 hours at a stretch. Sometimes the ingredients I needed were not available. There was no electricity supply.
 
So we had to use generators but its loud sound disturbed the shoot. Also, many times during the shoot some animals marched to the location and we had to pack up. I remember 4 African elephants came running towards us, attracted by the smell of oranges that I had to use in my dish.” 

However Graham, who was born in Zimbabwe where her parents had a small wildlife conservancy, says that she enjoyed the journey which took her back into time more than cooking. 

“I had always been so close to nature and the wild. Many a times in the morning, I would wake up in the conservancy with lions around me. This journey made me remember most of the time I spent in Zimbabwe,” says Graham.