Designer Anupreet Sidhu recalls that when she was five years old, her grandmother used to stitch almost all her clothes and also that of her dolls. 

The miniature outfits caught her attention and when she turned six, she had already decided to do something related to art and designing. Little did she know that her childhood dreams would turn into reality someday. Anupreet launched her label ‘Sidhu Ji’ in 2011 and since then, there has been no looking back for her. In a chat with Surupasree Sarmmah, Anupreet gets candid about her favourite things.

Two fabrics you like to work with...

When I started off, I was a ‘gen next’ type of designer and used to look for new fabrics all the time, but then I realised that Indian textiles can also be used as a next generation fabric. Since then, linen and khadi have been my favourite fabrics to work with.

An outfit you are never tired of wearing…

It has to be my little black dress.

One item that you want to discard from your wardrobe right away…

I want to get rid of all my wedges. They are so off-trend and I don’t like them anymore.

Three fashion trends that are classic and will never go out of vogue...

‘Kurtis’, as they are versatile and ever-evolving, shift dresses and flats.

Heels, flats or wedges…which one would you pick?

Flats. They are versatile and comfortable. In fact, one can mostly see me in flats.

Your latest collection looks cool and comfortable…

My summer collection is called ‘Touch of Grace’ which is primarily a resort wear and bridesmaid collection. There are two parts to the collection — daywear, which has bright colours like yellow, blue and red, and evening wear which comprises nude, glitter and gold. I have used fabrics like crepe, silk, net and georgette. I am mostly into 3D surface ornamentation and this collection also highlights that.

Do you believe in sustainable fashion?

Yes, sustainable fashion is important and it has become a necessity today. It is no more about recreating old stuff, but about creating a new fabric from old things and making different things out of it. It’s important for the  economy and the world at large.

If not a designer…

As a kid and even now, I am fascinated by the universe, so I would have been an astronaut for sure.

Other interests apart from fashion designing…

I am an adventurous person and enjoy hiking, rock climbing and paragliding. I am an amateur wildlife photographer too.