Weekends are a busy time for me as I take classes on both Saturday and Sunday. But as my classes are only for a few hours, it doesn’t feel like I am working at all. Besides, as I am not into competitive swimming now, it’s a relief that I don’t have to get up at 4 am anymore. So I start with a light workout session and take classes till 12 pm post which, I spend time with family, especially my twin daughters — Adele and Ariana. ADVERTISEMENTMy husband Bikranjit Chatterjee and I love taking the kids out. We want them to get a feel of the outdoors just the way we used to as kids. So we take them to the parks nearby or clubs like Catholic Club and Bangalore Club. We also get them into the pool and splash around with them. 

The best part about Bengaluru is the number of parks each area has and you get to connect with other mothers. In addition to these, there are places in different malls with play areas that are ideal for kids. Cubbon Park is also a place that we like to go to but due to traffic, we don’t go there much. 

Both Bikranjit and I are movie-buffs. In fact, when I was pregnant, we used to make it a point to go to the theatre and watch a movie at least once a week. But now, with the children around, it’s not possible. So on Saturday evenings, we like spending some quality time together. We leave the children at our parents’ place and catch a movie at home. We love to watch at least one movie a month and have a rule when we are doing so — no discussing work or babies!

As foodies, we love heading to any place that serves great food. As long as we get a quality meal, we don’t mind whether it’s a small ‘darshini’ or a five-star hotel. In fact, we plan to head to Mosque Road soon to enjoy the Iftar food. Corner House is also one of my favourite places and their recent addition — malted chocolate fudge — is my current favourite. In fact, I remember the time when I used to go there everyday with badminton player Aparna Popat after a swim as I had to indulge in high-calorie food as part of my diet. 

I don’t cook that often but I bake very well, if I may say so myself! During Christmas, I make a chocolate fudge recipe which is quite popular among my family and friends.

Sundays are reserved for meeting the parents. We all stay in and around Cooke Town and love to get together. My sister is married to a Coorgi so if we are lucky, we get some ‘pandi curry’ to savour while the kids cycle across the compound. 

As avid travellers, we used to do at least two trips a year just after marriage — local and international. But again with the children around, travelling has reduced. Be it white water rafting in Dandeli, spotting wildlife in Kabini or surfing in Pondicherry, India has so much to offer! And for us, a holiday doesn’t mean sitting in the room. 

We are out as early as 8 am and try to see as many places as possible. We are taking the children to Australia in a few days and plan to drive around the country. Kids love anything new and we are really looking forward to the trip.