The Central Empowered Committee of the Supreme Court has raised strong objections to mining  being carried out within one kilometre from the boundaries of national parks and wildlife sanctuaries in Rajasthan. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe committee has written a letter to the Rajasthan government, stating that mining  in such areas is a violation of the Supreme Court’s earlier orders of 2006.

In the letter, the Central Empowered Committee asked the state government to stop mining near national parks and sanctuaries immediately, and also share the name of officials who allowed mining in such areas despite restriction by the Supreme Court.

The letter stated that the Rajasthan government is bound to abide by the Supreme Court’s order in 2006, which clearly said that one kilometre area around national parks and sanctuaries should be declared as safety zones. 

In 2006, an organisation called the Goa Foundation had filed a petition in the Supreme Court, after which the court ordered that no activities should be carried out in the areas concerned.

Rajasthan government officials said a reply of the letter has been sent to the Empowered Committee. 

As per government records, 80 mines are operating within one kilometre of Sariska Tiger Reserve and Jamua Ramgarh Sanctuary.

On condition of anonymity, officials said that in 2011, the Rajasthan government had prepared a draft notification for eco-sensitive zones around its national parks and sanctuaries. 

The government stuck to a 100-metre safety zone in mining areas around Sariska Tiger Reserve and Jamua Ramgarh Sanctuary. 

Under consideration
The proposal is still under consideration of the state government.
The Indian Air Force has also raised objection to mining activities near its radars at Jodhpur airbase. 

Officials of the Jodhpur district administration said three sandstone mines are operating at a distance of 900 metres from IAF radars in Jodhpur.

The IAF had written to the state government stating that mining in the area may damage communication and electricity lines, which may be a threat to national security. 

Immediately after the objection, the mining department is reportedly planned to denotify the mines from its official records.