Delhi School of Photography’s (DSP) annual photography show ‘Confluence’ is back with the third edition at the India Habitat Centre. Every year, the school selects works from 20 to 30 students to give them a platform to showcase their photographs to a larger audience.

ADVERTISEMENTThis year, the exhibition covers varied themes ranging from wildlife photography to landscapes and child portraits. In terms of photo timing and focus, one finds it difficult to believe that the students as young as 15 have clicked these pictures.

“Through the exhibition, we want to give students the required exposure,” says 
Sonam Choudhary, 30, faculty at DSP and also one of the participants in the exhibition. 

The photographs displayed at the exhibition range from Rs 4,500 to Rs 8,000. But it is not money that the students are looking forward to. 

Recalling her experience when she first saw one of her photographs being sold, Choudhary says, “It was the best feeling ever! When people come and appreciate your work, you look forward to becoming a better photographer. It’s like you’re on a new high. It takes you a level up, no matter what photography course you’ve learned.”

With similar enthusiasm comes Tushar Chauhan, 19, who is displaying his photographs for the 2nd time in an exhibition. “In the previous exhibition, I didn’t get a chance to speak with the visitors. This year, it’s completely different because I see people looking at my picture and appreciating it. They also ask me to tell them how I clicked it. It boosts my confidence and motivates me to do better,” Chauhan tells Metrolife. 

After this exhibition, Chauhan looks forward to organising a solo exhibition of his works. “If a single picture garners this much response, imagine what it would feel like to have all of my photographs in an exhibition,” he says.

According to Deepak Virmani, dean, DSP, the venue of the exhibition also credits to a lot of engaging viewers for the students. 

“It’s a big thing for budding photographers to display their works in an exhibition. 
Not many photographers get to do this today. Also, here we have all sorts of art lovers and intellectuals coming, who appreciate students for their work,” says Virmani adding that the exhibition covers daily-life pictures with an interesting element added to each of them.  

‘Confluence’ is on display at the Convention Centre Foyer, India Habitat Centre, till 
June 22, from 10 am to 8 pm.