A 26-year old wood smuggler was shot dead by forest guards at Puramballi village in Suluru GP limits under Shettihalli wildlife area in Shivamogga taluk when the former was allegedly transporting teakwood logs in a goods vehicle.

ADVERTISEMENTAccording to forest department sources, the deceased has been identified as Ravi Naik, a native of Taralaghatta village in Shikaripur taluk. Ravi Naik’s gang had reportedly cut teakwood trees a few days back and was planning to transport teakwood logs on Tuesday.

 Acting on a tip-off, a five-member forest department team rushed to the spot and tried to prevent the gang from transporting logs. The six-member gang reportedly assaulted the forest guards with lethal weapons. Ravi Naik, the kingpin of the gang, was killed when the forest team opened fire at the gang in self-defence. The forest department team managed to nab two persons-Theerthahappa (28) and Gangadhar (21), and seized wood logs worth Rs 3.4 lakh, while three others managed to escape.

The death of Ravi Naik enraged villagers, who staged a flash protest blocking Sagar-Shivamogga road at Ayanur. The vehicular movement on the said road was disrupted for a while. The agitating villagers accused the forest department of firing at Ravi Naik with the sole intention of killing him and not to protect themselves as they claimed. 

They also demanded the department to provide compensation to the kin of the deceased and take disciplinary action against those who attacked Ravi Naik.

Eastern Range IGP M Nanjundaswamy, Assistant Commissioner Krishna Murthy, Superintendent of Police Ravi D Channannavar and forest department officials rushed to Ayanur and tried to pacify the enraged villagers.

Ravi Naik was passionate about bull-taming and won prizes in several competitions held in Shivamogga, Haveri and other districts . He had followers of more than 1,000 persons in his facebook account titled -shaldi bulls. People from Shikaripur, Hangal, Haveri had come to Ayanur to take part in the protest.

Speaking to Deccan Herald, Chief Conservator of Forest Smitha Bijjur said that it was not possible to provide compensation to the family member of Ravi Naik as he was indulged in an offence. The department would probe into the firing incident after collecting information from the officials concerned.