The killing of Madan Naik, Assistant Conservator of Forests (ACF), by inebriated revellers at the Dandeli wildlife sanctuary last week has brought the private resorts and homestays under the scanner of  the Haliyal taluk administration.

ADVERTISEMENTNaik had to pay with his life when he told the revellers in the park not to feed meat to the crocodiles in River Kali. 

Haliyal tahsildar Azeez Desai told Deccan Herald that he had directed the officials to verify the licences of all resorts and homestays in his jurisdiction, in the light of complaints following Naik’s death. The resorts and homestays are said to facilitate crocodile watching in the river by tourists for a fee.

A number of resorts and homestays are coming up in Dandeli, Haliyal and Joida taluks of Uttara Kannada district, where there is ample scope for tourism. The Jungle Lodges and Resorts (JLR) on the banks of River Kali near Dandeli and the Nature Camp at Kulagi are being run by the State Forest Department. 

While there is a bar on consumption of alcohol and other activities at Nature Camp, there is limited scope for fun and frolic in JLR, where there is a constant vigil. The prices are also slightly on the higher side in JLR. This leads revellers to private resorts and homestays. 

They are being set up on agriculture lands adjoining the forests. Along with boarding and lodging, the resorts and homestays organise trekking, fire camps and other activities.

Homestays, which function out of twin rooms in the towns, are quite a few in number in the district. Once the Tourism department, the district administration and the Revenue department give permission for these homestays, their responsibility ends. The common complaint is that thereafter, none of them bother to keep a check on the activities there.   
The managements also have to get the alienation certificate, besides permission from the taluk administration to sell food items and permission from the Excise department to sell liquor. 

“Though these resorts and homestays are cheek-by-jowl the forests, the Forest department has nothing to do with them. We have no jurisdiction over them and we can take action only if the forest or wildlife is harmed,” say the department officials. 

“We have no information on illegal activities in the resorts and homestays. We will take action if there is a complaint. A meeting was held at the station level with regard to the Naik case and we have now heightened vigil,” said Subhash Adimani, Additional Superintendent of Police.

K T Balakrishna, Uttara Kannada Superintendent of Police, said vigil on the resorts and homestays would be heightened, following the ACF’s killing. Their licences would also come under scrutiny, he said, adding that the police department would not allow any illegal activities. 

CID spot inspection

A team of the criminal investigation department (CID), led by Superintendent of Police K T Bheemaiah visited Halamaddi, the spot where ACF Madan Naik was assaulted leading to his death, along with his wife and children on Sunday. 

The probe team recorded the statements of Naik’s wife, daughter and son with regard to the incident. They also visited the Forest department guesthouse where Naik had stayed. The CID officials also spoke to the guesthouse watchman and took custody of the clothes that the ACF had worn. 

The investigators also collected information from member of the City Municipal Council Anil Dandagala, ex-member Keerthi Gaonkar and Mohan Halwai, taluk unit president of the Karnataka Rakshana Vedike - who were present at the police station at the time Naik’s family came there. 

The probe team also spoke to the officials and staff of the Forest department.
“The case will be probed from all angles. We will act against the suspects, including those in the police department,” Bheemaiah said.