The rare species of Kukkrahalli Lake were brought alive through a display of photographs at Chai Patthe, a cafe on Vishwamanava Double Road in the city.ADVERTISEMENTThe three-day expo, organised by Kukkrahalli Kere Ulisi Samithi, has displayed more than 85 photographs of different species. The event was inaugurated by wildlife movie makers B S Krupakar and Senani Hegde on Friday.The expo aims to introduce the rare species of birds and reptiles on the Kukkrahalli Lake premises and also to spread the importance of the lake and environment among the people. The exhibition has interesting photographs of common as well as rare birds, a rare six-toed green frog, Russell's viper, species of venomous snake, recorded in the lake are also on display. The photographs of migratory birds such as Grey-headed Lapwing were also on display. The lapwing, which migrated from Japan visited Kukkrahalli Lake twice in three decades.The lake holds a vast biodiversity and, the flora and fauna of the lake is meticulously documented since the early 1980s. As per the records, the lake is home to about 184 species of birds, which include 45 species of migratory birds. Out of 14 mammals, six are bats and golden jackals, seven frogs, 20 reptiles, 85 species of butterflies, 37 species of spiders and about 400 species of flora.D H Thanuja, an environmentalist and one of the organisers of the expo, said, "Kukkarahalli Lake is significant on many fronts. The lake has a history of over 150 years and, it was initially constructed for irrigation purpose and was subsequently used to feed the Government Sandalwood Oil factory."As the residential areas came up around the lake, the catchment area disappeared. In early 2000, the lake was developed with an aid from the Asian Development Bank and was opened to the public with a walking path. Since then, thousands of health-conscious people walk the path.IBA tagThe lake is listed under Important Bird Area (IBA) with a tag IN197. The tag is important as it internationally recognised and, signifies the importance of the lake and the protection it deserves.In addition to the expo, special talks on Kukkrahalli flora, biodiversity and about Kukkrahalli Lake conservation has been organised. Experts will deliver talks between 6 pm and 7 pm on all three days.InteractionThe participants of the exhibition interacted with Krupakar and Senani about the conservation of the environment. During the session, they said that the expo is an indirect approach to the people to show that animals, like human beings, are also part of the eco-system. According to them, human beings should understand that we are also part of the environment as other living beings.Krupakar-Senani, who had a good rapport with poet Kuvempu, also shared Kuvempu's passion for the birds and forest. "Kuvempu was passionate towards birds and the forest, he was capable of identifying the species of birds, only by observing their movements," they said.