There is something about water that mesmerises human beings. While the still waters brings one peace, the clashing waves of the seas invites us into its embrace. No wonder then that a roaring deluge of water falling from great heights has stunned the human being from times immemorial.

Even today, come monsoon and nature lovers set foot towards the waterfalls of all sizes and all geographies.

India is blessed with its fair share of mighty mountain ranges, especially the Western Ghats that are traversed by rivers, rivulets and streams. These rivers come gushing down the mountains and flow over the plains before joining the sea. Along the course of the rivers, many enchanting waterfalls spring to life. 

Belagavi district is an abode of many such waterfalls within a distance of 100 km from the city. Located at the tapering end of the Western Ghats, the terrain is quite uneven and hence, monsoon streams align to join into and fall off these slopes. Many of these waterfalls are seasonal and come alive only with heavy rains in the mountains. If the mighty Gokak Falls invites you with its muddy waters right up to September, when its roar weakens a bit, the others are no far behind.

However, a major caveat is the presence of leeches, especially during the monsoons and the immediate moist months. The area is covered by dense foliage and grass and the leeches make a particularly eerie way into your shoes. The other one is the slippery terrain, what with plenty of loose stones all the way and the red-black mud is notorious for being sticky.

Once you overcome these two hurdles, the views on offer literally take your breath away. With Belagavi offering great connectivity via rail, road and air, it proves an excellent point to start your itinerary with. Several nature lovers and trekking groups plan their treks to include these waterfalls since they are quite manageable. 

Chikhale Falls

Take the road from Belagavi city leading to Vishweshwaraya Technological University and reach Jamboti village, a unique topography awaits you. Known for its dense forest and wildlife spotting, Jamboti is also known for being at the confluence of Goa and Karnataka, and has its unique sloping roof houses, cashew and jackfruit trees and a unique way of dressing.

Another three km and you are at Chikhale village, from where you walk for another three km to reach the Chikhale Falls. The best part of this trek is the fog that keeps coming on and off and may interrupt your efforts to capture photos.

Vajrapoha Falls
Another gem of the Jamboti area, Vajrapoha Falls is known for its amazing white crystalline waters, and hence the name Vajra-Poha, which literally means a shower of diamonds. This one would forever be etched in my mind as I encountered the leeches for the first time. The area is a treasure trove of flora and fauna. As this waterfall is on River Mahadayi, it requires you to trek for a long distance, even crossing the river, which we did with much fear, in spite of the thick rope.

Since it is situated within the precincts of the Bhimgad Wildlife Sanctuary, one has to seek permission from the Regional Forest Officer at Nagargali to reach this falls. The water gushes down from a height of around 150 feet and the serene environs make it all the more enchanting. 

Sundi Falls

Nestled amidst the beautiful tapering ends of the Western Ghats is the Sundi Falls. One can club the trip to the historic Vaijnath Temple which sees thousands of devotees thronging for a darshan, 
especially during the month of Shravan. 
A quick drive to Mahipalgadh and thereupon to Sundi village takes you near this 50 feet high falls.
Again strewn with pebbles and lose stones, one needs to be very careful. However, being at a small height means that one can walk right up to the bottom of the waters and enjoy a stint of showers. This results in a large crowd during the weekends and the peak monsoon seasons comprising mostly of the youth who wade through the stony terrain. 

Kalasa Falls

River Kalasa joins River Surla, before River Surla enters Goa, but not before jumping across a few gorges of its own. Kalasa waterfall comes before the Surla Falls and offers a tempting view. Also identified as a stream, River Kalasa jumps down from a height of around 25 feet with a  cascade of thick white water. The falls also has a local name, Barajanancha Ojhar or the stream of 12 people, referring to a local tale of 12 people who apparently jumped off the falls, insulted by some issue.

Although not as majestic as Surla Falls, Kalasa Falls also attracts quite a lot of tourists, especially since the Kankumbi area is now home to some good resorts. One can engage travel guides who take tourists on a round trip from the resorts to the falls and even provide food. This makes it easy for city dwellers to have a hassle-free weekend. In the absence of proper eateries and the locations being deep within the forests, it would not be easy to reach on your own. It is also a place to spot thousands of species of plants, birds, insects, monkeys, flying squirrels and other fauna.

Carry your own water bottle and eatables as you will feel really hungry with all the walk and the steep climb and also some tobacco, spray and plenty of match boxes or lighters, just in case leeches camp on your feet.