The Lime Diaries’ by Byond Travel celebrated its one year anniversary recently with a lineup of storytellers who told riveting stories that held the audience in The Humming Tree spellbound. Grit, perseverance and endurance took on human forms as Sharath Gayakwad, Satyarup Siddhanta and Sanjay Gubbi recounted their experiences in water, between clouds and inside jungles.

ADVERTISEMENTAn Arjuna awardee who represented India at the 2012 Paralympics, Sharath talked about the pressure during training period but yet giving his best every time he got into the water. He also talked about how athletes struggle through adverse circumstances and situations to perform for their country.

Satyarup talked about realising his dreams of scaling heights, something which no unfavourable circumstance could wipe away; not even his asthma. He talked about losing lakhs of money due to postponed expeditions and struggling to find a sponsor as well as the rigours that one has to endure during mountaineering. Satyarup has climbed the highest mountains across six continents, including Mt Everest, and is looking to climb the highest mountain of Antarctica by the end of the year.

Sanjay Gubbi is one of the leading wildlife biologists in the country who works on understanding and conserving tigers and leopards. He was recognized as one of the ‘25 Leaders of Tomorrow’ by Times of India. He spoke about his journeys to some of the most enchanting places that offered unique, and sometimes dangerous, experiences. During the recent incursion by a leopard at a Bengaluru school, Sanjay and his team saved both the leopard and people around despite him being ferociously attacked by the leopard.

Photographs and videos showed the scenarios being described by the speakers in vivid detail. The storytelling session was further enlivened by a question and answer session between the speakers and the audience.  The witty answers and funny repartee had the audience in splits.
'The Lime Diaries', curated by Byond Travel, rediscovers the lost art of storytelling with travellers sharing unforgettable and often humorous anecdotes from the road.