It’s said that ‘Luck is when opportunity knocks and you answer’. In the case of the members of ‘Lucky Leopards’, it was indeed luck and opportunity that brought the six of them 
together.

A particular experience brought them together two years ago. Passionate photographers, they had headed to Kabini to spot the Black Panther but returned unlucky. 

However, fate was kind to them and they spotted a leopard sleeping on a branch by the road side — an episode that became the highlight of the trip.

Naveen Naraseeyappa, an IT professional and one of the members, says, “The six of us split into two different vehicles in the hope of finding something interesting to photograph. When 
one group took too long to return, we went in search of them and realised that they were busy capturing pictures of the sleeping leopard.”

For the first time in his life, he captured about 700 pictures of a leopard where the animal posed for about 20 minutes. 

“In wildlife, being able to capture an animal for that long is never heard of. To our surprise, it wasn’t affected by the noise of the vehicles either,” he adds.
 
And thus was formed ‘Lucky Leopards’ — a wildlife photography club. 

Praveen N Gowda, a lawyer, explains, “It’s a great experience to be able to learn about different animals. Within the group, we discuss how to take a picture without disturbing the environment.” ADVERTISEMENTSrujana Deva, an IT professional, says, “We have a WhatsApp group where we discuss different topics in photography. We focus on bringing out the importance of wildlife in our conversations.”

An orthopaedic surgeon and a member of the club, Chandra Nandan adds, “It’s a different experience every time we meet.  I am actually interested in bird photography but with these boys, I have started exploring the wildlife as well and enjoying it too.” 

Busy with their personal lives and professions, the members don’t get to meet as often but they plan a trip to the nearby forests once in three to six months. Sateesh Kumar Lanka, the Head of the Pharmacy Department in Vydehi Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre and a member of the club, says, “We know that our pictures might not make a huge difference, but we want to contribute in some way to conserving wildlife. We have a chance to do that through our pictures and  we  make the most if it.” 
What makes them gel together is their like-mindedness.

 Vinay NP, a consultant says, “None of us are professional photographers but we are equally passionate and concerned about nature. We are aware of the importance of nature and  want to set an example for others as well.”

(‘Lucky Leopards’ can be contacted at 9901066179)