One crucial way to curb poaching, according to conservationists, is to accept the reality that forest protection is a never-ending job. It requires round-the-clock monitoring. This, especially in a scenario where many species numbers are dwindling, for a variety of reasons ranging from timber and mining lobbies to habitat destruction and encroachments, writes Madhumitha B. ADVERTISEMENTIn the last two decades, India has lost nearly 1,000 tigers and almost 4,000 leopards to poaching alone. The statistics gathered by Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI) also highlights that since 2009, Karnataka alone lost 36 tigers, some of them due to poaching as well, apart from other causes. According to one report by an organisation that focuses on wildlife crime-related issues concerning tigers and leopards, these numbers probably represent only a fraction of the actual poaching and wildlife trade from the country.

Also, these numbers are not indicators that poaching is limited to tigers and leopards. This vicious racket does not spare several other species in our forests. What the mechanisms involved in conservation  are supposed to do when protecting the biodiversity across the country is to hold on to the natural balance and allow the ecosystem to be inclusive of all species, animals and plants. 

It is not an option but a responsibility to save what is left of our forests from going down the fast lane of destruction.

Challenges to conservation

Human-animal conflict, habitat destruction, cattle grazing in the forests, timber and mining lobby, encroachments and poaching. All of these stand in the way of conservation and often thwart the effort put in to mitigate these challenges. 

Every year, numerous species of wildlife are displaced and killed when they come into contact with one or several of the above interferences. Every year, recommendations are made to counter these threats and while this works in some areas, the others continue to be vulnerable. 

A trade as grotesque as poaching deserves an equally fitting or an even more aggressive counter measure. If today, this illegal means to making money and holding on to silly superstitions and myths is constantly finding a way to assert itself, then it is a shameful situation for the entire country, including those spearheading the policies. 

This organised crime racket that has its presence all over the globe has grown largely as a result of unguarded patches of forests, protective measures that throw more questions than provide answers and many times fail to stand by the principles of conservation and a wildlife trade that the law is struggling to largely curb.

A credible response is a must, felt Praveen Bhargav, former member, National Board for Wildlife and Trustee, Wildlife First. 

According to him, India has very strong laws for protection but enforcement on the ground needs improvement. 

He adds, “The primary goal has to always be prevention and by that I mean, preventing hunting, and that requires eternal vigilance. However, despite the best of efforts, some hunting will still happen which then needs to be tackled by quick detection, aggressive investigation and effective prosecution. Since all reserves face the threat of illegal hunting, a robust mechanism to prevent and detect offences must be in place.” 

Challenges are inevitable but unacceptable when these roadblocks become dead ends. Poachers, today, use several modern methods of operating and only some states have measures to counter them while others do not even have the wherewithal to deal with this intrusion, said Romulus Whitaker, renowned herpetologist and Founder-Director of the Snake Park in Chennai and Madras Crocodile Bank Trust. “There is tremendous impact on wildlife due to the complex issue of poaching. Coupled with that is forest destruction that also adds to the loss of something as valuable as the wild lands and wildlife itself. Often this is the result of lack of awareness or simply indifference towards biodiversity by the very people of the country, that accelerates such a damage,” added Whitaker.

Vigilance is key

Poaching is unfortunately so rampant today that while its existence is known even to the common man, the enormity of the issue is masked by ignorance. If the statistics available are anything to go by (and maybe it must be), the severity of the problem and the challenge it constantly poses to conservation is one that is daunting on many levels. 

There is one underlying approach to overcome this vulnerability, according to conservationists and that is to accept the reality that forest protection is a never-ending job. 

It requires continuous, unhindered, round-the-clock monitoring. And that could cover the vigilance for anything that comes up against protection of reserve forests and is especially a strong measure for the bane that is poaching. 
With some jobs, there is the luxury of closing for the day, to finish off and be able to take a break. Forest protection is not one of them. One cannot afford to let down one’s vigil.

“In most wildlife reserves that are not affected by insurgency, the time tested multi-tiered protection system comprising foot patrols, a network of strategically located anti-poaching camps, mobile patrols and check posts with trained and equipped forest personnel with quality leadership would be sufficient,” explained Bhargav.

Additionally, public opinion plays a huge role in pushing policy makers to make sustainable decisions. 

It might seem like the voice of one person is inconsequential but when that is combined with so many others are apprehensive to speak out, it goes a long way in raising that united whole that then can actually contribute in some large way to protecting either a habitat, a species or making an impact on a political decision, according to Whitaker.

There is less than three per cent of land dedicated to forests in India. Finding the means to conserve this is not asking for much at all. It is imperative to protect this from any intrusion or destruction for the benefit of the environment.