The Supreme Court on Thursday said that deaths of 40% of translocated cheetahs from Namibia and South Africa in less than a year painted a worrying picture of the state of affairs, as it suggested the Union government to consider if they can be shifted to some other sanctuaries.ADVERTISEMENTThe court also sought to know why all the cheetahs were only sent to the Kuno National Park in Madhya Pradesh.A bench of Justices B R Gavai, J B Paridwala and Prashant Kumar Mishra pointed out that two more deaths have happened last week and asked the government not to make it a prestige issue.Read | Reports attributing some cheetah deaths to radio collar use speculative: Govt"Why is this becoming a prestige issue? Please take some positive steps. Also, why were they all put in one place instead of being spread? 40% deaths occurring in less than a year does not paint a good picture," the bench told Additional Solicitor General Aishwarya Bhati, appearing for the Centre.The court suggested that some of the cheetahs could be shifted to Rajasthan, particularly at Jawai National Park, which is very famous for leopards. As many as 20 cheetahs were translocated to India from Namibia and South Africa in September 2022 and February 2023 in two batches. Eight cheetahs, including three cubs, have died at Kuno National Park since March this year, due to various reasons.Bhati assured the court of taking all requisite steps in this regard. She said when similar projects were implemented in Rajasthan, deaths of tigers occurred within enclosures. She also submitted at authorities at the highest level have taken cognisance of these deaths. “After all, this is a prestigious project for the country," she said. Bhati also submitted that the deaths are not alarming, as up to 50% of deaths were anticipated within the first year of the project.“We want to know. Prima facie it appears our conditions do not suit them. They reportedly suffered from respiratory problems. One was detected with kidney ailment,” the bench told Bhati. Read | Skin infection behind latest cheetah deaths at Kuno National Park, say expertsCheetah was declared as extinct from the country in 1952. Wildlife expert M K Ranjitsinh-led committee, which is assisting the court, has pointed out that none of the members of the government-appointed task force are cheetah experts. The committee filed a plea in the court for an urgent hearing following two cheetah deaths last week.The court put the matter for further hearing on August 1, while asking the government to file an affidavit explaining the reasons and remedial steps.