Lion tailed macaque are the symbol of the endemic biodiversity of the Western Ghats of India. These primates have inhabited the rainforests for hundreds of years and hence have evolved into arboreal monkeys that have simple digestive systems relishing the abundant fruits of the tropical rainforest and occasionally devouring on insects and small preys like squirrels they can catch. 

ADVERTISEMENTBut Western Ghats are no more the lush, dense, foliage rich forests of yester years. With people replacing natural green with urban greys, the monkeys too have had to relocate and adapt themselves to the dwellings and constant cacophony created by humans. Scientists now find that it is not just the homes the monkeys have lost. It has also cost them their health with a number of stomach infections invading their tummies, thanks to the urban junk they are forced to eat.

Lion tailed macaques once rarely stepped on the ground of the undisturbed, unbroken forests. But now, with more than 25 per cent of their jungle canopies fragmented, the primates have had to literally step down from their heavenly abode of treetops to the hellish environment created by humans. And as per a new study, this is what is also consequently making them vulnerable to many stomach viruses. According to researchers Shaik Hussain, Muthuvarmadam Subramanian Ram, Sisinthy Shivaji, and Govindhaswamy Umapathy of the Hyderabad-based Laboratory for the Conservation of Endangered Species and Ajith Kumar from the Centre for Wildlife Studies attached to the Bangalore-based Wildlife Conservation Society, macaques forced to live near human settlements have new parasites inside their stomach.

The researchers studied lion tailed macaque population living in the Annamalai hill of Tamil Nadu. These hills along with the upper canopy of primary tropical evergreen rainforest of the Western Ghats in Kerala and Karnataka form the primary abode of the primates. Over the years, however, the trees have been either chopped down for timber needs or the wild forests have been replaced with exotic plantation such as tea, coffee and eucalyptus. The macaques have also been forced to feed not on the wild growing berries but man-made fruit forests such as those of guava, jackfruits, passion fruit and others. 

It is this distorted eating habits that has made them more vulnerable to stomach parasites which were earlier not even known to exist in the macaque world.

“High prevalence and species richness of gastrointestinal parasites are directly linked to habitat fragmentation, high anthropogenic activities (caused due to human activity), and high host density,” the study says. The authors noted that fragments such as Puthuthottam, Andiparai, Korangumudi, and Varattuparai were under serious ‘anthropogenic pressure’.

Lion tailed macaques are old world monkeys, which, some scientists say are the ancestors of all Asian monkeys. While they enjoy eating about 200 different species of fruits, they are also important seed dispensers in the forest. But at present, just a sparse bit of their original homes are available to the 4,000-odd survivors in fragmented populations in the rainforests of the Western Ghats.

With the new problem of their increasing vulnerability to stomach viruses surfacing what also becomes a concern is the mortality rate of infants. This is because the macaques are slow breeders, with females giving birth to a baby once in five years approximately. Births are temporally clumped along with the fruiting season dictated by monsoonal climate. 

Stomach parasites are more prevalent during monsoons too and the direct impact of this can be more young ones getting infected and higher mortality, further threatening the population of the primates. Added concern too is the hunting of the animal for meat and medicinal purposes.

Apart from the obvious danger to the future population of the monkeys, the study has also highlighted the extent to which a single hasty step can lead to a gamut of environmental problems. Deforestation of the Western Ghats began as a measure to provide more land for farming and housing needs. 

The immediate impact was the loss of species diversity and habitat for many life forms like the macaques. Today, that one change has impacted the health of the monkeys and the loss of green cover has also led to drastic weather fluctuations leading to greater problems like global warming. This is a live example of how a series of superfluous events are set into motion by one thoughtless step. UNESCO recognised the Western Ghats as a world heritage site last year. 

All this 1600-km long mountain chain needs is to be left alone from human interference and remain the self-sustaining ecosystem it has remained for centuries. But power plants, mining and illegal timber use are constantly devastating the Ghats, significantly risking the lives of all its inhabitants, including the lion tailed macaque. 

The Western Ghats Ecology Expert Panel had, in its 2011 report, called for declaring the entire Ghats an “ecologically sensitive area,” much to the chagrin of pro-development lobbies. Controversies continue as inch by inch, forest lands slip away from forest dwellers, forcing them to adapt to the human world. What no one foresees is what greater damages are still to occur that jeopardise not just the animals and plants, but the lives of humans who created the mess in the first place.