The mela had people from various parts of Chamarajnagar district pouring in for three days. Trees were felled to make way for vehicles.

The four paths, through Aralahalli, Bankahalli, Marigudi and Baragi - all prohibited areas - were flooded with people, who arrived in all kinds of vehicles. Many camped there for weeks. 

Two generators making loud noise illuminated the forest and entertainment programmes like ‘harikatha’ and bhajans were organised for the devotees.

This is not an isolated case. The Reserve, known for its best tiger density in the country and being part of the Mysore Elephant Reserve, is now facing a threat from temples which are flooded with devotees. Local MLAs openly support such activities.  Bandipur has 10 temples, which witness a sea of devotees. Local wildlife enthusiasts say that annually lakhs of people visit these temples and the forest officials, who are only handful in number, are rendered helpless. 

“At the recent mela of Beladakuppe Mahadeshwara, the forest staff could not do much considering the crowd. The number of police personnel posted too was less. To make matters worse, the Assistant Conservator of Forests had gone for training and the Range Forest Officer was on leave due to health reasons,” said a wildlife enthusiast. 

During such melas, traders also make money by setting up temporary stalls. Shops of all kinds and hotels do brisk business. Agriculture implements, including tractors, are on display. Cattle are also on sale. 

Though Section 27 of Wildlife Protection Act prohibits tresspass into the Tiger Reserve is prohibited, a study by some activists at Aralahalli checkpost on the first day of the recent mela showed that 150 people entered the forest per minute. The forest staff faced a tough time pushing the jumbos, straying out as a result, back into the forest.

Even though the use of loud speakers, felling of trees, smoking and drinking within the forest is banned under Wildlife Act, such activities are common in all the temples during the mela. Hundreds of trees were felled for the firewood for cooking. The local politicians, keeping in mind the vote banks, patronise such fairs. There is also evidence that they lead the people to the temples in the forests.

During the meeting called by the department to discuss the draft notification on the Eco Sensitive Zone in Bandipur, several MLAs pressured the forest department to permit the locals to offer prayers at the temples which are in prohibited areas. However, the officials said the matter could be discussed later. 

All these temples draw lakhs of people during winter (the month of Karthika as per the Hindu calendar). The only exception is the Gopalaswamy Hill Range, where the temple of Himavad Venugopalaswamy draws crowds throughout the year. 

Major temples

Tavarekatte Madappa in Bandipur range, Venugopalaswamy temple in Gopalaswamy Hills, Kanive Madappa in Gopalaswamy Hills, Marigudi in Maddur range, Ayanur Marigudi in Ayanur Marigudi, Beladakuppe Mahadeshwara in Hediyala Range, Alaganchi Marigudi in Moleyur Range, Basaveshwara temple in N Begur Range, Durga temple in Gundre Range and Devara Madu Madeshwara in Kundukere Range. All these are crucial tiger habitats and beyond the tourism zone.
ADVERTISEMENT