With their habitats changing, sloth bears are  more prone to conflicts with humans. Efforts should be taken up more  diligently to save both from such situations, writes B K Singh.

ADVERTISEMENTWhile animals such as tigers and elephants dominate the attention of wildlife managers with regard to conservation strategy and research, some lesser-known species are often forgotten. One such animal is sloth bear, which is the most common bear species in India. 

Sloth bears feed on termites and ants. Despite morphological specialisation like long front claws, short hind legs, long and near naked muzzle, long and raised palate and loss of first maxillary incisors in adults, they have a considerably broader diet. This is because they adapt to seasonal and geographic changes in food availability. 

Sloth bears are vulnerable in the wild, and are listed in Scheduled I of Wildlife Protection Act 1972. Often, the habitats of sloth bears are disturbed by urbanisation and by people collecting minor forest produces such as honey and firewood, among others. This limits the resources available for these wild animals. 

The loss of habitat is augmented by the development of stone quarries and mining. Due to the rapid changes in sloth bears’ habitats, they are known to have become extinct in Bangladesh over the past 30 years. Furthermore, the sightings of sloth bear in India is now limited to Protected Areas (PA) only. 

Shrinking resources
Villagers and stakeholders on the fringes of sloth bear habitats do come in close contact with this animal while moving in their fields and adjoining forests, which often results in conflict. Most studies reveal that instances of human-sloth bear conflict increase when the crops are ready for harvest. The conflict also escalates in the post-harvest season, when villagers enter the forests for collection of non-timber forest products (NTFP). This depletes the availability of food for them. At times, NTFP collectors and cattle grazers put some forest patches on fire to facilitate harvest and easier grazing. 

The shrinking and degradation of habitats for developmental needs are the main reasons for human-sloth bear conflicts. Humans are often attacked by sloth bears accidently as humans come in close contact with their activities. Hence, it is advisable for humans to be watchful while moving in the habitats of sloth bears.

Sloth bears also face the threats of traps that are being set up by hunters and poachers to capture wild animals. For instance, recently, a young sloth bear suffered severe mouth injuries when it  swallowed an explosive that was 
concealed in food bait. The animal was rescued by Wildlife SOS, an organisation that works towards protecting and conserving India’s forests and wildlife, and transported to the rescue centre at Bannerghatta (run in collaboration with the Karnataka Forest Department). This bear rehabilitation facility is home to nearly 80 rescued bears. The veterinarian found that the bear has suffered severe damage to its mandible and skull. This bear succumbed to injuries within a week. In a similar incident, another sloth bear    found near Chikoppa village, Kanakpura taluk, Karnataka was critically injured by the explosion of a crudely made bomb laced with food, that is often used as bait to hunt wild animals.

Connecting the dots
In addition to the Bannerghatta bear rescue centre, Wildlife SOS runs many other facilities for rescued bears across the country in collaboration with each state’s forest department. One such facility is the Agra Bear Rescue Facility, which is the world’s largest rescue and rehabilitation facility. It houses more than 200 sloth bears, many of which were poached by the Kalandhar community from the wild. 

The chief wildlife warden of Karnataka  has granted a research grant to Wildlife SOS to study the reasons for rising conflict between humans and sloth bears. They will be gathering data regarding the behaviour of sloth bears using camera traps in some key areas in Koppal and Ballari districts, and getting detailed information about habitats through a drone survey. When information related to habitat is superimposed on conflict data, the emerging pattern will help the department in planning and executing mitigation measures.

In the interest of conserving the biodiversity, we must make efforts to arrest the trend of degradation and shrinkage of the habitats of these species that share the landscape with us. Communities dependent on forests that are home to the sloth bears must be provided with alternative livelihood options. The endeavour of state and central governments, and civil society organisations should be to run education and awareness campaigns among the stakeholders so that the conflict is minimised and conservation of forests and wildlife is ensured.

(The author is retired principal chief  conservator of forests, Karnataka)