With the reserved forests in Western Ghats not receiving the required protection in comparison to the national parks, they have become soft targets for various projects, like the proposed Yettinahole project. 

The ongoing mini hydel projects in the Western Ghats have already damaged the forest land, and the implementation of Yettinahole project would only prove as a major disaster, warned Kuduremukh Wildlife Foundation Co-ordinator Niren Jain.

He was delivering a talk on ‘Yettinahole diversion project: Emerging threat to the source of River Netravati,’ at a programme organised by Rotary Mangalore Metro here on Thursday. Recalling how the human activities were completely stopped in Kuduremukh National Park and Pushpagiri Wildlife Sanctuary, due to the continuos struggle of the activists, he said the policies towards the reserved forests are weak due to which the projects like Yettinahole could be easily implemented. ADVERTISEMENT“The Central government gives nod for implementing the project in reserved forests in an easy way, for they are not highly protected, despite the existence of wildlife habitat and the bio-diversity,” he said.

Pointing at the two decisions taken by D V Sadananda Gowda when he was the chief minister, which would prove costly to the people of the district, Jain said, “it was DV who approved the project and refused the proposal to upgrade the portions of Western Ghats as highly protective zone.”

The environmentalist displayed the pictorial representation of how the existing mini-hydel power projects have damaged the purity of water and bio-diversity. He said, going by the report of the proposed Yettinahole project, the implementation of project would lead to massive destruction of trees.

“You can not grow forests, you can only grow trees. Planting saplings under afforestation programme, would not replace the natural bio-diversity that we have already lost. We may have green cover by growing trees, but not the natural forest with rich bio-diversity. 
We are losing forests, due to the lack of emotional investment in forests among the city dwellers,” he maintained, adding that Netravati river flows after monsoon, only due to the trees that act as sponge by absorbing and releasing water.

He also said that project has been planned in such a way that the people can not question it. As the project is implemented within the State, the people can not approach the tribunal that has been set up to mitigate inter-state problems. 

However, there is an option to point out the loopholes in providing the environment clearance and fight for the issue, he said.