The Anti-Naxal Force (ANF) has kept a tight vigil in the forest area of Kodagu, following speculations on the movement of Maoists.ADVERTISEMENTAn identified man and an unknown woman who had come to Yavakapadi village on Thursday afternoon have raised a lot of speculations. The man wore a shirt and pant while the woman wore a salwar.The villagers have said that the duo did not carry any weapons. It is alleged that the duo had stolen rice from a house and had snatched a mobile phone from a woman from a house in the village.However, Superintendent of Police Dr Suman D Pennekar said that the mobile phone said to be snatched by unknown persons was found nearby later. But no clues of Maoists have been found during the search operations. The photographs of wanted Maoists were shown to the villagers. But the villagers could not recognise them.A leader from Budakattu Krishikara Sangha said that around 15 kilograms of rice were missing from a house belonging to Kudiya community in Yavakapadi village. Therefore protection should be given to the villagers.The woman who lost her mobile phone said that when she was going to the farm to make a telephone call as there was no network near her house, two people, a man and a woman appeared out of the blues. “When I raised an alarm by screaming, the woman who was wearing a salwar snatched my mobile phone and warned me of dire consequences if I informed about it,” said the woman.Considering the seriousness of the incident in Yavakapadi village on Thursday, the police and ANF have intensified combing operations in the forest areas.Many villages in Kutta limits have been identified as sensitive. The ANF personnel are on vigil at Brahmagiri Wildlife Sanctuary, Makutta, Naladi, Birunani, Karike, Talacauvery, Srimangala and Irpu.Following an exchange of fire between Maoists and police in Wayanad in March, the security was tightened in the region. Security check-ups were also intensified at check-posts. The possibilities of Maoists moving to Kodagu are being looked into.It is also being said that Maoists have migrated in different groups after hiding their weapons in the forest. The rumours on Maoist movements have created panic among the villagers dwelling near the forest area.