Chief Minister Siddaramaiah directed officials of Sri Chamarajendra Zoological Gardens to take measures to house the maximum number of species of animals to make it more attractive.

Addressing a gathering after inaugurating the Vanyaranga Mandira, the amphitheatre inside the zoo to mark the 125th year celebration of the zoo, on Thursday, Siddaramaiah said that Mysuru Zoo is the pride of the city and thus officials should make it more attractive by housing more number of animals from across the world.

Siddaramaiah asked Zoo Authority of Karnataka (ZAK) Chairperson Mallige Veeresh to see if night safari can be introduced. He promised to provide Rs 25 crore to the zoo to develop the Central Parking Hub on the land earmarked for it on the Exhibition Grounds for the convenience of the visitors. “Parking woes are long pending and the state government will sanction the funds but officials should resolve the issue soon,” he said.

Earlier, Mallige Veeresh had urged the CM to provide funds for the parking hub, the Chamundi Animal Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre at Hootagalli and also for completion of works on aquarium in the zoo. The chairperson also urged the CM to take measures to regularise the services of contract workers who are working for the past two decades. 

She said the zoo has 4,871 animals, including birds and the officials had plans to provide free entry for physically challenged persons on Tuesdays, a closed holiday for the Zoo.

The chief minister released a documentary film on Mysuru Zoo and also special postal envelopes and stamp. The film, in both Kannada and English languages, gives detailed information about the Zoo as well as wildlife.

Provide jobs

A youth urged the CM to help him secure a job in the zoo on compassionate grounds. 

Pointing out that his father was an employee of the zoo, he said that though he has received an order to this effect, the officials have not given him the job.

‘Clear C&R rules’
The CM directed Forest Minister B Ramanath Rai, who was present on the stage, to take measures to implement the Cadre and Recruitment rules (C&R rules) to regularise contract workers and also give him a job on compassionate grounds.

Explains Kannada grammar

Siddaramaiah displayed his hold on Kannada grammar by explaining about ‘sandi’ and ‘samasa’. He unveiled a 20-feet-tall commemorative stone plaque marking the 125th year and also named an elephant calf as ‘Parvathi’ which was born in the zoo recently. Coincidentally, his wife’s name is Parvathi.

PWD Minister H C Mahadevappa, Food and Civil Supplies Minister U T Khader, Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests B P Ravi, Deputy Commissioner D Randeep and Zoo Executive Director C Ravishankar were present.

DH News Service
ADVERTISEMENT