For centuries, people in India have known the stories of the 12 incarnations of Lord Vishnu including the Kurma (turtle) avatar. It is believed that this avatar helped the devas and the asuras churn out the amrut or life giving nectar from the ocean. In the scientific world, while there is little place for such mythological fiction, it is not wrong to assume that the turtles of our natural world are an important agent of life that are helping pass on crucial nutrients from the oceans to the lands. 

Because of their unusual life cycles, turtles spend their life in the seas but come on the shores for nesting and breeding thus enriching the energy-poor habitats on land such as the sandy beaches with marine nutrients. This simple ecological service by the turtles has been crucial in shaping the coastline of the country including that of Karnataka. And yet, the winds of change bring with themselves destruction, fragmentation and threats of poaching to the turtles, making it more and more difficult for them to survive. 

Five species of the sea turtles are known to inhabit the Indian coastal waters and islands. These are the olive ridley, green, hawksbill, loggerhead and the leatherback turtles. Except the loggerhead, the remaining four species nest along the Indian coast with the olive ridley turtles being the most famous, gathering in thousands annually for their mass nesting along the coast of Odisha. Besides these, India is also home to 28 other species of tortoise and freshwater turtles 25 of which are threatened. 


Dangers turtles face

In 2011, the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) found in its research that 54% of the global turtle population was under the threat of extinction. This included four species from India – the critically endangered red-crowned roof turtle (Batagur kachuga), the endangered Asian forest tortoise (Manouria emys), the extinct black softshell turtle (Nilssonia nigricans) and Cantor’s giant softshell turtle (Pelochelys cantorii). Rick Hudson, President of the Turtle Survival Alliance (TSA), calls this the most significant wildlife crisis of our times because the turtles are not dying individually but in masses, and in most cases, these massive scale wipe outs are because of human interventions.
Take the case of Karnataka. Turtle nesting is of sporadic nature in the state, and research on the turtles has been limited here.

Still, a Government of India-UNDP sea turtle project identified 40 nesting locations along three districts of Karnataka — Dakshina Kannada, Udupi and Uttara Kannada in 2001-2002. Beach surveys indicate that the olive ridley nesting season occurs across Udupi from September until February, with some seasonal variability in the peak nesting season. A survey in 2008 indicated the presence of green turtles in Nethrani and Hog islands in the Uttara Kannada area. The survey also found that these were the feeding grounds of green turtles that nested on Sri Lankan beaches.

Even with the limited numbers, turtles coming to feed or breed off the coasts of Karnataka are a target for humans. Excessive harvesting of turtle eggs and accidental capture in fishing nets are some of the major risks faced. Other factors such as pollution from marine debris and toxic chemicals, sand mining, destruction of important habitats like mangroves pile on, creating a number of big and small hurdles for the turtles in every stage of their lives — whether as eggs, hatchlings or adults. 

This scenario in not unique to Karnataka but replicated in a much larger scale in other states on the east and west coast of the country as well, where the habitat is much more expansive for the turtles. Thus, while the natural obstacles for the turtles are staggering, it is man-made pressure that is making the world an unbelievably alien place to survive for these animals. 

Extinction risks for the freshwater turtles are no less. In January, two persons were arrested in Karnataka by the Forest Department for trying to sell a special species of turtle with ‘12 nails’ for a pricey amount of Rs 15 lakh. If not rescued on time, the poor animal would have ended becoming an aid for performing black magic, believe the forest officials. In 
the illegal wildlife markets, especially near the river beds like that of River Tungabhadra, it is common to find turtles and terrapins being sold for consumption for somewhere between Rs 100 and 200 per kg. Caught live, the turtles are kept upside down to prevent them from walking and escaping and are often severely dehydrated.


Towards conservation

Despite the challenges, the efforts taken by some organisations and the state forest departments have not been in vain. Sometimes, the cultural significance and traditional reverence for the turtles have helped experts and conservationists in encouraging people to save rather than kill the turtles. A World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF)-lead survey of the turtle species in India found that the turtles in  the Uttara Kannada district in Karnataka are considered sacred and are revered by local communities and furthermore, some even refrain from any physical contact with the animals.

Incidents have been recorded where fishermen have willingly damaged their nets and released the turtles trapped accidently while fishing.

Another interesting aspect shows that fishing communities, such as the Kharvis of Apsarakonda in Uttara Kannada, have banned all activities found dangerous to sea turtles with a community court penalising anyone found in possession of a turtle or its eggs. Such practices though in very limited area, indicate  the general perception of the local community towards conservation, and a community engagement programme can only scale it towards better managed turtle conservation.

At places like Honnavar and Kundapura areas, for decades now, Field Services and Intercultural Learning (FSL) India and the Canara Green Academy operate with the explicit aim of protecting turtle eggs from consumption, and conducting awareness campaigns within coastal communities. These non-profit organisations work closely with the members of the local artisanal fishing community to implement environment-friendly strategies for coastal development and to assist in the protection of key turtle nesting habitats.

Initially, the organisations purchased turtle eggs from the sellers and relocated into hatcheries for conservation. Later, Canara Green Academy evolved a unique method of involving poachers in conservation by turning them into informants and giving them honorariums for their services. This strategy has helped avoid the purchase of eggs and reduce its consumption by the local communities.

The achievements being made at a local level in each turtle habitat across the country are worth noticing and point to the fact that empowering locals is always a good way to permeate the ideas of conservation. If a network is created where successful strategies implemented at one place can easily be relayed in other locations with similar challenges, the entire stretch of coastal India can indeed work towards a common goal of saving the much revered turtles.ADVERTISEMENT