In two proximate villages, Vettangudi Patti and Kollukudi Patti in Tirupathur taluk, that encompass three “Kanmaai’s” (large irrigation tanks), the “mantra” on everyone’s lips is not any esoteric or sacred chants, but a speech-act that delivers “silence”.

If the Vettangudi Bird Sanctuary, nestling on two of these tank beds spread over 38.4 hectares, is still pleasant to thousands of migratory birds from around the globe for over four decades, it is thanks to a golden rule the people of these two villages have passionately upheld, a la the Bishnoi community’s creed to preserve all life forms.

It is scarcely believable that in these days of high-decibels excitements, about 800-odd people of the village Panchayats, closest to the sanctuary, have given permanent holiday to fire-crackers. Even beating a small drum badgering native pride is a taboo for a profoundly environmental cause.

While Vettangudi was officially declared a bird sanctuary in June 1977 by the Tamil Nadu Forest Department, for long years before, an amazing variety of migratory birds have been gravitating to the “Kanmaais” of the two villages to make it a nature’s receptacle for nesting and breeding.

The Vettangudi Bird Sanctuary, located about 51 km from the temple city of Madurai, is not just an ornithologist’s delight for its rich miscellaneous croons. It also mirrors how humans live in harmony with nature setting aside cultural compulsions.

It is not that the villagers do not celebrate a universal festival like “Diwali”. Little bright lamps dot the homes for the occasion. “But, for the last 43 years, as I know, nobody has burst a single cracker to celebrate the festival as we don’t want the loud noise to disturb or unsettle the birds that flock,” says Chinnaih of Vettangudi.
Typically, birds from distant lands reach the sanctuary by September-end every year and stay on till March, said Mr Palanichamy, Forest Ranger, Tirupathur. By that time, the birds would have hatched and the young ones eager to take wings. This year, 5000 birds have already homed in so far. 

As rest of India celebrated “Diwali” with a variety of deafening crackers, from the sturdy “Red Fort double”, ‘thousand wallahas’ to ‘atom bombs’, the locals playing host to these birds observed as usual, a quiet, self-imposed moratorium on all crackers.
“The people here do not use  fire crackers or beat the traditional drum even at a funeral procession  as it can scare away the birds,” says Sivaganga District Forest Officer Sampath Lal Gupta. The migratory birds come for “nesting and breeding”, mostly from the Trans-Himalayan region, and some of the erstwhile Soviet Republics like Uzbekistan and Azerbaijan, Tibet, besides from Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Myanmar and Maldives.

Giving birth to new life is so sacred in Eastern traditions that nobody wants to inconvenience the birds with a sharp rustle, adds Gupta, explaining how the villagers are, “somewhat like the Bishnois practicing this self-restraint to protect wildlife.”
The people in these two villages may not be total vegetarians like the Bishnois, but when it came to ensuring a comfortable, noise-free ambience for the birds to nest and breed, the people caringly bond with them. 

“It’s a concern we show for the birds as we would do for our children by ensuring all is silent here,” says, Karunambikai, a resident. “To give up a custom may seem no big deal, but people do it for the birds,” she adds, explaining the importance of being earnest in saying ‘no’ to crackers.

The veteran bird watcher of the village, K R Veeriah, lists 25 exotic winged ones who come calling to Sivaganga District every year.

The Forest Department also reinforces the people’s creed, routinely sensitizing people right from school children upwards. “Even a kid will tell why not to burst crackers,” chuckles Veeriah, adding, the birds can be viewed, without binoculars, in a close natural setting. 

As a reciprocal gesture to the villagers, “We pass on proceeds of the sale of bushes-like growth as firewood to the Village Forest Committee” to encourage their conservation efforts, said Gupta, adding, the funds so transferred averaged Rs.75,000 per year in the last three years. One small step by the people has meant a leap for wildlife protection at Vettangudi. 
ADVERTISEMENT