It was Punith Suvarna’s passion to explore the world that took him on a different journey. Although this Bengalurean holds a LLB, he is an ardent photographer and considers nature and wildlife photography as his forte. “It has been just one-and-half-years since I am in this field but in this short time, I have learnt and experienced a lot. 

ADVERTISEMENT“I was a traveller before I found my interest in photography. I explored new places and its natural beauty. Soon I wanted to capture these natural moments and freeze them as memories. That’s when I started gaining interest in photography,” explains Punith. He adds, “I started with a digital camera, then to a bridge camera, and finally shifted to DSLR. I have not done any course in photography — it is all self- taught.”

He defines photography as the ‘power of the camera and the creativity behind the camera’. For most of his clicks, he uses the Tamron 150-600 lens. The first picture that he clicked, he says “If I see it professionally, it was the ‘Tickell's blue flycatcher’. Otherwise, ‘Flowerpecker’ was my first click.” Does he use any photo-editors or filters to make his photos look attractive? “I use basic light correction and sharpness which is allowed in nature and wildlife photography, Sometimes, one cannot capture the exact thing that the eyes see. However, I don’t do anything else like cloning or removing the original background for another,” he says. 

According to Punith, photography is all about pre-visualisation — about what one can do behind the camera and how much knowledge one has about the technicalities to get the best out of something. He says, “In nature and wildlife, especially birding photography, it’s all about a fraction of a moment to capture what one wants. Here, the accuracy matters and the smallest of moment is important.”

His biggest achievement was when his photograph was published in the National Geographic website for the ‘most popular photograph’. It was ‘The monkey drinking water from a tap’. If one looks at his clicks, elements like exposure, background, catchlight and sharpness are the major attraction of his photographs. 

He takes inspiration from his mentors Satish Pujari, Naveen Kumat Topu, Shiva Subramanya and Madhu Shekar. He says, “Satish was the person who took me into the wild and showed me what is actual wildlife photography. Naveen taught me everything about birding photography and he taught me how to approach, observe, react and respond to different birds and  the specific features to concentrate upon, Shiva Subramanya was the one who taught me the ethics to be in the wild and Madhu Shekar enlightened me with the technicalities of a perfect capture — the frame, light, background and the various elements on how to make a picture different from the other.”

On what motivates him to click a picture, he says, “Nature and its unmatched beauty motivates me to a take a picture. It is amazing how nature presents us with something new everyday. One good photo and I am happy for a week (laughs).” Most of his photographs are clicked in and around Bengaluru, Chikmagaluru and Mysuru. Asked whether he has any plans of going abroad and explore his skills in photography, he says, “No, not for now, India is a beautiful place and I need to finish up with our country before landing in another. There is a lot to explore here.”