A mixed reaction emerged to the proposed four-laning of the highway from Nelyadi to Chitradurga at a public consultation meeting held in Chikkamagaluru on Saturday.ADVERTISEMENTThe people residing in Mudigere Handpost and Chikkamagaluru Bypass Road areas participated in the
meeting.Bhadra Wildlife Protection Trust Trustee D V Girish said, “There was no need to lay Shishila-Bhairapura Road by felling trees. Shishila-Bhairapura is known for its rainforest. We are not for package 1 of the project from Nelyadi to Mudigere Handpost. There are six roads to connect Dakshina Kannada. The authorities should think about improving the road using the latest technology.”The proposal does not speak on the management of water resources, he added.Deputy Commissioner M K Srirangaiah clarified that he is neither for the project nor against it. The programme aims to elicit suggestions from the public, he added.Environmentalists S Girijashankar said that there is no clarity on the land acquisition for the project. Shishila-Bhairapura receives 300 inches of rainfall annually. The highway should not be laid, he said.“The laying of the road on Shishila-Bhairapura will affect flora and fauna of the Western Ghats. Instead, it is better to develop Charmadi Ghat,” said wildlife activist G Veeresh.Civil engineer Stany Nathan said, “The pros and cons of the project have not been revealed. There is a need to keep in mind sustainable development.”Panchakashari of Dammanahalli said, “The four-laning of the highway will benefit the people. The Forest and Revenue Departments should work in coordination while implementing the project.”Somegowda of Malaloor said the road will benefit the trade activities.Amithraj said, “Scientific study should be conducted. A special package should be announced to Shishila -Bhairapura area. There is a need to give priority to development.”Advocate Yathiraj said, “The project is good. The compensation should be paid for the land acquisition.”Under package 2, 20 villages in Chikkamagaluru taluk — Machagondanahalli, Kelagooru, Chithavalli, Kudavalli, Vasthare Aladagudde, Mahajiddu, Dambadahalli, Shiragunda, Kadrimidri, Malalooru, Ambale, Mugalavalli, Karthikere, Aradavalli, Ramanahalli, Hosakote, Kyathanabeedu, Lakya, Chikkagowja and Hiregowja - are covered.Under package 3, seven villages - Kurichikkanahalli, Kengenahalli, Tadabenahalli, Uddeboranahalli, Kenkeri, Srinivasapura, Jakkeri Kavalu - are covered.