The festival of Dasara brings in its wake many stories of yore. ‘Gombe Habba’, the festival of dolls that is the mainstay of this festival, is the perfect platform for one to narrate and recollect these stories through a grand display of figurines.

Many families in the city have already begun arranging Dasara dolls in keeping with a tradition that has been passed down from generations.

Most households display anything between 200 to 1000 dolls. The focus is on displaying the dolls in a unique manner and telling the stories in a different way.

Harsha Shivlingh, a freelance content writer, has grown up watching his mother put together the Dasara doll display. She would narrate stories to him after each set of dolls were arranged.

Today Harsha has taken over the reins and carefully arranges the figures year after year. This time, he has chosen a animal park theme.

“There are a lot of children in our neighbourhood so I thought I would educate them and create awareness about wildlife conservation and give the children an insight into the animal kingdom through the doll display this year,” says Harsha.

He has dolls that have been passed down over four generations.

“My mother belongs to the fourth generation. We have wooden dolls that are around 100 years old and clay ones that are 50 years old. Each set of dolls tells a different tale. As a child, I would listen to my mother’s stories about the birth of river Kaveri, how Shiva married Parvathi and Lord Krishna’s childhood - all narrated through these models,” he recollects.

Fifty five-year-old Sukanya Nagaraj, a resident of Jayanagar, has chosen to depict the Mysuru Dasara procession through her doll display this year.

“I have witnessed the Dasara procession in Mysuru only once and I was impressed with the scale and grandeur of the event. I wanted to depict the same in my collection. The dolls will be displayed in the backdrop of the Mysore Palace. The idea is to tell the youngsters about the significance of the festival,” says Sukanya, whose children Nitin and Nikita also join her in arranging the display. Sukanya has about 200 dolls.

“I was gifted my first set of dolls during my wedding and I later added to the collection,” she adds.

Usha Venkatesh Murthy’s home comes alive during Dasara, thanks to about 500 to 600 dolls that are displayed. Usha too works on a different theme each year.

“Last year, I focussed on the ‘Jumbo Savari’ and Mysuru Dasara procession. This year, I hope to depict the ‘Sita Swayamvar’ through the doll display. The dolls’ dresses and jewellery will also be made to suit the occasion. The display will also have about 100 dolls that I have made using clay,” explains Usha, who has been displaying dolls in her home for the last 25 years.

All the dolls in Sita Prakash’s collection are made from mud.

“My motive behind displaying the doll collection is two-fold. I want to revive a lost tradition as 
well as send out a message of protecting and preserving the environment through my collection of mud dolls. I will be working on the ‘Navarasa’ theme this year,” says Sita.

She feels that it is important to educate and enlighten the younger generation on the significance of telling stories through dolls during the festive season of Dasara.

ADVERTISEMENT