Gajendra to be ‘Nauphat’, Balarama to be ‘Nishane’ during the Jamboo Savari 

ADVERTISEMENTArjuna, also reckoned as a temperamental elephant, would continue as the howdah elephant during Dasara. There were speculations that Arjuna will be replaced, as his mahout, Doddamasti, died at Ballehaadi in D B Kuppe range of Nagarahole in early August.

Though Masti had retired a couple of years ago, he was adept in managing Arjuna smoothly and thus his services were sought to manage Arjuna till last Dasara. 

Following his death, Venu is performing the role of mahout. While Sannappa (Mahesh), is acting as kaavadi for Arjuna, and the jumbo is following their directions, said an official. If everything goes well with Arjuna, he will carry the golden howdah weighing 750 kg. Sannappa is Doddamasti’s son.

Deputy Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) Ganesh Bhat said that a decision will be taken only after assessing the performance of the elephant during rehearsals. “The Dasara rehearsal will begin after the elephants reach Mysuru Palace on August 26. All the elephants are healthy and are doing well. The performance of all the jumbos will be assessed,” he said.

The first batch of elephants — Arjuna, Balarama, Abhimanyu, Gajendra, Kaveri and Vijaya — have arrived at the Aloka Palace. An officer said that even Gajendra and Balarama will be trained to carry the golden howdah.

Gajendra in 

Gajendra, which was out of last Dasara, as he had killed another Dasara jumbo, Srirama, and its mahout, Ganapathi in mast, is participating now. 

Gajendra will perform the role of ‘Nauphat’ while Balarama, who was a howdah elephant for 14 years, will be the ‘Nishane’ during the Jumbo Savari between the Mysuru Palace and the Bannimantap on October 11. Female elephants Kaveri and Vijaya would act as kumkis and accompany Arjuna, the officer said.

Palace preparations

The authorities have erected temporary truss sheds on the Palace premises where the Dasara elephants and the families of mahouts and kaavadis will camp from August 26, till the end of Dasara. A separate shed, measuring 40X80, will be erected in front of the Kodi Kalabhyraveshwara temple for Arjuna, and a female elephant will be housed in a separate shed, said the officer.

Besides, 20 sheds for caretakers of Dasara jumbos, a tent school, a health centre and a kitchen have been erected on the premises. The second batch of elephants will join the first batch on the Palace premises after August 26.