Photographer Akashendu Das aka Akash’s criterion is not just to focus on the object but to weave a story around each photograph. Like the one of a tiger in mute colours shot at Jim Corbett National Park some three to four years back, represents the decreasing count of tigers yet indicates a hope that things will change and the number of tigers become normal. 

ADVERTISEMENT“It’s a wide angle shot that covers the lane the tiger is walking upon . There is a purpose behind it as it shows the long way the tiger has to go when they are vanishing at a fast pace. Similarly, the soft light percolating through the canopy and falling on the tiger indicates that there is still a ray of hope and the coming generation of human race will experience the excitement of witnessing a tiger for at least once in their lifetime,” says Akash, who recently put up an exhibition of 60 of his best photographs in the exhibition ‘Fashion, Wildlife and Travel’ at the MG Mall.

Basically, a wildlife photographer from last fifteen years, Akash’s expertise in playing with the colours and the mood, makes him one of the ten most powerful people in photography industry. He is considered to be the pioneer in the art of visual communication and photography, and is one of the most prolific and commercially successful photographers in the country today. 

His latest exhibition brings to life the intrinsic beauty and distinctive personality of its subjects. His brilliance lies in capturing the essence of the moment. In a photograph where a foreigner plays with the sand, Akash shows a foreigner’s love for India. “It is basically a mood shot. The basic purpose was not to shoot the beauty of the desert but to present how a foreign woman, who is unknown to the country, falls in love with it and totally emerges her soul into it. She dresses like Rajasthani woman and plays with the sand,” says Akash, who is perfect in capturing the emotions and bonding through his lens.

Other photographs on display included those related to fashion, which was not just about clothes but the colours and the mood surrounding the muse.