Most of the children these days are glued to phones or tablets when they are not studying. But 12-year-old S B Niyathi is different. A self-taught wonderkid, she is considered one of the youngest painters in Tamil Nadu. She dismisses  talk that she is a wonderkid and blessed. The little artist says every child is gifted with talent. Niyathi  claims she channeled her talent at the age of three and started painting.

Niyathi said whatever she visualised, she drew on white paper or a board. She continued with her drawing and when she was six, she could neatly draw Lord Krishna on a white board. “At the age of four, my daughter used to draw balloons and different animals on a paper without any help. However, after seeing her drawing of Lord Krishna, we decided to groom her,” Niyathi's mother Vidhya said.

“My parents encouraged me a lot when I was eager to paint at a young age. They gave me an identity as an artist. I find my identity in the god,” Niyathi said. 

The girl said that when she is stuck or annoyed during  work she will try out several options and keep making efforts till she draws a picture that is to her satisfaction. “This has helped me to improve my skills quickly,” she said.

Niyathi, who is studying in the seventh standard in a private school in Chennai, is always willing and happy to explain to people about her passion and painting. Besides Lord Krishna, she had drawn a horse at the age of six and it also had won appreciation. “I remember very well that it took more than two hours for me to draw the horse,” Niyathi, who loves animals, recollected. 

Niyathi's parents, especially her father Balaji, wanted his daughter to make full use of her talent. The parents took the girl to Sri Annai Kamakshi Kalaikudam and the institution helped her to hone rough edges in her painting skills. From then on, there was no stopping of Niyathi, for whom winning prizes at exhibitions has become a norm. 

The instructors at the institution encouraged and guided her to participate in various exhibitions and competitions. “During her training she mastered the technique of strokes. Niyathi is really gifted as she finished two levels of art examinations in one year. The achievement is creditable and quite impressive,” Venkatachalam, the art master who helped Niyathi, claimed.

Venkatachalam said that at the age of eight Niyathi started participating in competitions and exhibitions. “Though she was very young, Niyathi's  paintings started finding place in several expos,” he said.

“My first major award was through public voting. I had painted Lord Vishnu's Dasavathara in water colour. I had worked really hard for almost two months on the work,” Niyathi said.

“I love to draw and paint on subjects or objects which I like. I paint Lord Krishna because I like his naughty looks and he represents what I feel. I also paint animals as symbols and believe they represent the meaning of love,” Niyathi said.

The girl's artwork has not affected her education as she has been excelling in studies till now. “Though my school bag also contains colour sketches and paint brushes, I never skip my homework. My drawing and painting help me to relax and focus more on studies,” she said.

Her class teacher and the principal encourage Niyathi and want the girl to judiciously split the time between studies and painting. Niyathi’s steady progress has helped her to hold a solo exhibition recently.  

“I was very happy that I have reached a position to organise solo shows,” she said.  At the exhibition artwork on a variety of animals was on display. Niyathi said that it was a small tribute to her love for animals. About her future, she said, “I want to become an artist and a wildlife photographer as I love animals”.

Painting has had a huge impact on Niyathi's health. She says she loves painting because it has given an outlet for her creativity which doesn’t sap her physical energy. She enjoys the freedom painting gives her to be expressive and says she would happily paint for hours. The artist says she never played games or watched entertainment apps on her parents’ mobile phones. 

“I know to operate mobile phones and tablets. But games on gadgets do not interest me,” she said.

Niyathi feels emotional relationships with people and animals. She explains that while drawing the picture of a giraffe with her calf, she realises an unconditional feeling of love towards her mother. “I felt real love towards my mother, when I was giving the final touches to the painting,” Niyathi said.

The young girl occasionally uses pencil and charcoal for her work.  Niyathi enjoys dancing also. She did not forget to say that she prefers to paint in private most of the time--she doesn’t  like even her friends watching her work!

On her ambition to become a wildlife photographer, Niyathi feels that now she is too young to use cameras. “Time will come for my clicks,” she says. Armed with hundreds of paintings, Niyathi is busy preparing for national and international level exhibitions.