For photography enthusiats this might be the best exhibition to learn from and also to be part of. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe Visual Arts Gallery will be hosting the launch of a coffee-table book and photo-exhibition – ‘Rajasthan Under the Desert Sky’ by ace photgrapher Rajesh Bedi, from August 8 to 13.

The exhibition and the book are unique in their approach as they reveal Rajasthan and its secrets in a manner unmatched by any previous attempt at documenting this beautiful region.

For most visitors, Rajasthan is in a state that represents grandeur and royalty. But the photographer’s quest was to look beyond the customary splendour of Rajas­t­han. Using hot air balloons, microlite and cameras mounted on high-flying kites, he has experimented with photography to present the vastness of Rajasthan from a fresh perspective. The outstanding aerial landscapes that have resulted complement the ground-level photographs.

Talking about his collection, Rajesh Bedi informs Metrolife, “The idea of having life size photographs is to take viewers directly to the situation and let them feel the place and its beauty. For me, Rajasthan is the most beautiful state in many ways, having amazing light conditions, sand dunes and deserts. The colours are so bold. It has miles of quiet landscape and suddenly you find hundreds of lamps breaking the monotony of the arid scape. It is just so beautiful.”

As a photographer, Rajesh has tried to capture rare glimpses of Rajasthan’s wildlife too and gained moving insights into the communities that protect wild animals as an article of faith. Perhaps most rare is a sense of universal motherhood reflected in the image of Kiran Bishnoi of Jodhpur district offering suckle to the young chinkara gazelle and her own son together; a unique example in the world of harmony between man and nature.

Sharing his thoughts about the challenges faced while shooting, Rajesh shares, “Taking shots from air was a challenge because of blow of air in the balloon. But I think I managed to take what I wanted to.” The launch of the book and the exhibition on the same day will also see Kiran Bishnoi feeding her own son and a chinkara at the venue.