‘Team comprising police, reps from ULBs to keep tab on use of plastic’ 

Kodagu Deputy Commissioner Anurag Tiwari has issued an order banning the use of plastic bags and plastic cups with thickness of less than 40 microns that harm the environment.

He has instructed the police department and officials of urban local bodies to impose penalty to those who violate the rules by using the plastic bags of less than 40 microns in any part of the district. 

In his order dated March 15, the Deputy Commissioner who is also the Chairman of the District Tourism Development Committee has said that the Kodagu district has sensitive environment and it is inevitable to ban the use of plastic bags to protect the environment. 

Further, he has stated that the decision has been taken considering the Environment Protection Act 1986, Wildlife Protection Act 1972, the notification of the Environment and Forest Ministry of the Government of India dated February 4, 2011 and the notification of Karnataka Government dated October 20, 2010.

“A team of officials including those from police department and urban local bodies will be formed to keep a tab on the use of plastic usage. The team will pay surprise visits to shops and inspect them. Plastic bags if found will be seized and shop owners will be penalised,” Tourism Department Assistant Director Phanish has said.

He stressed that the first priority of the district administration is to control the sale of plastic bags.

 The team will raid the shops based on suspicion and the team is expected to be formed after Lok Sabha elections. 

As a large number of tourists visit Kodagu, instruction boards about the plastic ban will be placed in the entry points of the district. Tourist vehicles will be inspected and plastic bags if found, will be seized, he said.

It could be recalled that the use of plastic plates and cups was completely banned during the Akhila Bharatha 80th Kannada Sahitya Sammelana held at Madikeri in January. The initiative had received overwhelming response from people.ADVERTISEMENT