It’s like the stereotypical middle child. Surrounded by tourist hotspots like Ooty, Bandipur and Madumalai, Masinagudi, for most people, is often little more than an obscure halt spot on the road to a holiday destination. But if you decide to stop here for longer or make a weekend trip to the picturesque town in Tamil Nadu, you won’t be disappointed. We weren’t.

It was supposed to be a much-needed break from the urban humdrum. “Why don’t you go to Bandipur instead?” asked a well-meaning friend. Yes, she had a point. It is closer to Bengaluru and the chances of spotting wildlife there are higher. But our visit to Masinagudi was meant to be.

Deer domination
My fondest association with the place is the spotted deer — also known as Chital or Axis deer. We saw them everywhere — right outside our cottage, along the roads, herds of them grazing silently. When they sense a human presence, a swift look is the only response. And then, they are back to nibbling on the greens. But every once in a while, a little deer does get shepherded back into the woods. Ah, to watch them run! It’s quite a sight!

I only wish they didn’t have the lousy langurs for company. The two, evidently, share a mutually beneficial companionship. The langurs’ good eyesight and the deer’s superior sense of smell assist them both in early predator warning. However, while the deer minds its own business, the langurs are more likely to get too close for human comfort.

There are no such issues with the elephants, though. Unless you do something stupid, like sound the horn when they are crossing the road. Remember, when in a jungle you got to make way for the wild. If you love elephants, you mustn’t miss their morning-bath ritual at the Theppakkadu elephant camp near Mudumalai Sanctuary. We didn’t make it for the early morning treat, though we managed to get there in time for their evening meal. Even though we have watched elephants eat on TV several times, the anticipation and cheer of the crowds that bought tickets to watch the live feeding session was something else. When the first elephant gulped down a ball made of rice, horsegram, ragi, salt and jaggery, the kids in the audience were delighted — as were the adults armed with smartphones and professional cameras.

Private operators here don’t have the requisite permission to conduct jungle safaris. However, they can arrange for one at the adjacent Bandipur National Park in Karnataka. For those who don’t fancy a ride in the park, there are safaris conducted on the peripheral roads running through the adjoining forest. We opted for one such ride, only to spot more nosy humans than wild animals. They were all over the place — darting willful flashlights on a lone Sambar deer, making a hue and cry about every rustle in the woods. We are told that a tiger was spotted on the very street our jeep was trudging along on just two days ago. Alas, the tiger and its clan had better plans this time!

Nesting birds 
The bird-watchers here are a happier lot, though. This hilly terrain of the Western Ghats is known to house many a hornbill, woodpeckers, red crest, mynas, owls, barbets and parakeets. Trekkers and nature-lovers have enough reasons to love this place, too. Just for the record: I’m neither a bird-watcher nor a trekker. And, honestly, nature is not my thing. Yet I loved the place. 

Something about its energy and the fact that we were without wifi (though it’s available at select areas for a price) or the TV... And the deer, of course! I found my perfect stress buster. The next time I feel life is too much to handle, I’ll just shut my eyes and visualise Masinagudi. I may have missed out on the big cats, but I did see the most beautiful sunset from an open jeep in the middle of a jungle. Not to forget, the sky full of stars. So many of them. When was the last time I saw something so out of this world?

ADVERTISEMENT