Art

ADVERTISEMENTExploring feminity

Gallerie Ganesha presents a group show ‘Feminine Divine’ that includes works in oil, charcoal, pastel, acrylic and watercolour by 13 eminent artists from all across the country. The show explores the various qualities of the feminine, namely, Jagat Janani- Universal Goddess, Shakti - Primordial Energy, Ardhangini - Rightful companion, Janani - Mother, Annapurna- Nurturer, Naayika- Prima Donna and numerous other roles a woman fulfils in her life, transforming into one or the other as the occasion demands. 
Venue: Gallerie Ganesha, Greater Kailash II, till December 11. Time: 11 am to 7 pm.

Wild world

Vikramaditya Singh a self-styled and eclectic wildlife artist hailing from the royal family of Palaitha (largest principality of Kotah, Rajasthan) has come up with his latest collection ‘Wild-Works’. The paintings represent Vikramaditya's own evolution. His work has a dramatic and expressive edge. Charcoal strokes represent the energy of the beasts and the colour work echoes the light, variety and textures of these wild creatures. Venue: Villa Ortiga, Vasant Kunj, December 9 onwards. Time: 11 am to 7 pm.

International artist

French artist Thomas Henriot’s travelling art show, ‘Across the city’  has reached the Capital. His drawings are ink on Japanese rice paper that scrolls 45 centimetres wide and sometimes up to 25 metres long which he unwinds as the progression of the drawing goes along. He juxtaposes figurative motifs, landscapes, architectures, characters and 
elements which are at his disposal around him. 

Venue: Alliance 
Francaise, Lodhi Estate, 
December 6 to 15. 
Time: 11 am to 5 pm.

Films

Korean festival

Korean Cine Experience 2013 brings the best of the Korean movies for Delhiites. The three-day long festival will showcase seven Korean films. The opening film of the festival is Barking Dogs Never Bite by Joon-Ho Bong. Other films to be shown at the festival are Breathless by IK-Joon Yang, Rough Cut by Hun Jang and Show Must Go On by Jae-Rim Han. Focus will also be on Indian remakes of Korean films which include Zinda - remake of Old Boy, Ugly Aur Pagli - remake of My Sassy Girl, Awarapan - remake of A Bittersweet Life. Venue: Korean Cultural Centre, Lajpat Nagar IV Time: 6.30 pm
(December 6) and 12.30 pm onwards (December 7 and 8).

Dance

Bharatanatyam performance 

As part of Mandala Celebrations, Dancer Geeta Chandran will present a solo Bharatanatyam performance entitled ‘Bhakti-Manjari’. In her performance she will present traditional items from her vast classical repertoire that showcases the temple origins of the dance form.Venue: Ayyappa Temple, RK Puram sector 2, December 7. Time: 6.30 pm. Entry is free.

Ballet festival

Shovana Narayan and Naresh Kapuria present a ballet festival ‘Tryst with the Past’. Two ballets ‘Jehan Ara: The enigmatic Mughal Princess’ and ‘Kadambari: The Poet’s Muse’ will be staged. Both the ballets take a peep into the lives of two women from the past, one from 17th century and the other from 19th century. While Jehan Ara was a gifted poetess, Kadambari was well versed in classical Indian literature and was the critic and sounding board for her brother-in-law, Rabindranath Tagore's literary efforts. Venue: Kamani Auditorium, December 11 and 12. Time: 7 pm.

Exceptional footwork

2To Tango presents the third New Delhi International Tango Festival. The festival features two brilliant teachers from Porto, Portugal – Alexandra Baldaque and Fernando Jorge. Different orchestras will be the highlight of each night.The orchestras will cover all cycles of the tango era starting from the Guardia Vieja (old guard) to the different facets of the golden age (early, rhythmic, lyrical and dramatic). Venue: Delhi Gymkhana Club, December 6. Time: 8 pm. For invites call 9810526727

Cultural heritage

Lalit Kala Akademi Regional Centre-New Delhi is organising a ‘Kalamezuthu Festival - Delhi 2013’. Kalamezuthu is a traditional art form of Kerala which comprises painting, music, dance, drama and magic. It started around 4th century in the southern region of India.  It’s an art form of social expression. There is nothing better to call it as traditional form of contemporary art installation. Venue: Garhi Studios, East of Kailash, December 8-14. Time: 2 pm to 8 pm.

POTPOURRI

Fun filled extravaganza

The International Children’s Festival of Performing Arts brings to the Capital a weekend of pure joy and fun. Celebrate the spirit of childhood with 24 international performances like musical plays, dramas, circus and puppet shows from 21 participating countries from across the world and 150 performances by school children.Venue: Kamani Auditorium, LTG Auditorium, Talkatora Stadium and National Bal Bhawan, till December 8. Time: 9 am till 9 pm. Entry is free.

Music

Folk renditions

Kutle Khan, the Sufi and folk maestro will perform with his troupe this week. The event is organised by the Genesis Foundation, where the Manganiyar musician from Jaisalmer will give a soulful,  and energetic recital of Sufi and folk music. The troupe has performed in over 40 countries and their music 
has been influenced by Rajasthani and Western 
traditions. Venue: Zorba, 
Sultanpur, December 6. 
Time: 7.30 pm. For entry 
contact 9810883871

Vocal camaraderie

Ministry of Culture and Lok Kala Manch presents vocal camaraderie of ragas and devotional songs of Kabeer, Meera, Tulsi and Surdas by Dr Vibha Chaurasia and Abha Chaurasia. The duo will be accompanied by Tansen Shrivastava on tabla and Damodar Lal Ghosh on harmonium. Venue: Lok Kala Manch, Lodhi Road, 
December 7. Time: 6.30 pm.

Sitar recital

Pabitra Chatterjee, disciple of Swapan Kumar Das and Deepak Chowdhury will give a sitar recital in the City this week. Pabitra Chatterjee is a B-High grade classical instrumentalist of All India Radio (Akashvani). By profession, Pabitra is a medical representative of a 
pharmaceutical company. Venue: IIC, Lodhi Estate, IIC, December 6. Time: 5.30 pm.

Rock concert

Rock bands Them Clones, Mob Marley, Rishi Inc, Hundred Octane and Map will perform at ‘Rock for Child Rights’ concert. The band’s stirring performance is perfect to unwind and start your weekend.  The concert will give a refreshing change from the regular hip-hop and commercial music. Venue: Zorba, Sultanpur, December 7 and 8. Time: 4 to 10 pm. 
For reservations contact 
9654 614161

Paying homage

K.L. Saigal Memorial Circle will pay homage to Ghazal Queen Begum Akhtar in her centenary year. She is a well known singer who has 
received Padma Shri and Padma Bhushan (posthumously). On the occasion scholar Pran Nevile will speak on the life and times of Begum Akhtar. It will be followed by a concert by Rashmi Agarwal. Venue: Indian Habitat Centre, Lodhi Raod, December 6. 
Time: 7 pm. Entry is free.

Drama

Contemporary lives

Between The Lines is an English play starring Nandita Das and Subodh Maskara. The play revolves around Maya and Shekhar, a lawyer couple, who have been married for 10 years. Shekhar is a high-profile criminal lawyer, while Maya balances work and life, drafting routine contracts for a law firm. As destiny would have it, they end up arguing on opposite sides of a criminal trial, resulting in the blurring of their personal and professional lives. Venue: FICCI Auditorium, Tansen Marg, December 7 and 8. Time: 7 pm. Tickets available at the venue and www.bookmyshow.com

Comic satire

Pierrot’s Troupe will stage Ghalib in New Delhi and 14 vs 15 August 1947 this week. Ghalib in New Delhi is a Hindi comedy revolving around Mirza Ghalib’s rebirth in 21st century, highlighting his trials, travails and tribulations. 14 vs 15 August is a comic satire on partition. It is a unique play that uses ‘comedy’ as a device to confront the very basis of India’s division in 1947. 

Venue: Alliance Francaise, Lodhi Estate, December 8. Time: 3.30 pm (Ghalib...) and 7 pm (14vs 15 August).

An adaptation

The Old Man and the Sea is an English play based on Ernest Hemmingway’s novel. Conceived, adapted and directed by Shivani Tibrewala, the play is about an old fisherman who sees the fish as his brother rather than as his enemy or his prey. In their quest for life, the fisherman and the fish are united – silent witnesses to each other’s quiet struggle. Tom Alter is in the lead role. Venue: India 
International Centre, Lodhi Estate, December 6. 
Time: 6.30 pm.

Popular act

Dramatech presents God of Carnage a play by Yasmin Reza. Two sets of parents meet in an upscale home of a posh Paris neighbourhood to discuss the playgroup fight between their sons. But everything goes wrong. Tulips fly all over the room, vitriol deface the coffee table art books and a bottle of vintage Santa Rosa rum brings out the beast in all four of them. Venue: Shri Ram Centre for Performing Arts, Mandi House, December 7 and 8. Time: 6.30 pm

Endless discussions

The play Raaste revolves around three friends Gangadhar, Kachubhai and Gokhale. Each of them believes in different ideologies like Marxism, Jainism and Hinduism and has full faith in their cultural past. They engage in endless debates and discussions as to how we can have a superior political, social and economic order which can turn the world into a better place to live in. The play will be performed by Asmita Theatre Group. Venue: Muktadhara Auditorium, Bhai Veer Singh Marg, December 6. 
Time: 7 pm. Entry is free.