Wildcats mimic their prey’s calls
ADVERTISEMENTFor the first time, researchers found a wildcat species imitating the call of its intended victim in order to hunt it.

“Cats are known for their physical agility, but this vocal manipulation of prey species indicates a psychological cunning which merits further study,” said WCS (Wildlife Conservation Society) researcher Fabio Rohe.

Researchers first recorded the incident in 2005 when a group of eight pied tamarins were feeding in a ficus tree. They then observed a margay emitting calls similar to those made by tamarin babies.

When a tamarin ‘sentinel’ climbed down to investigate the sounds, a few more followed, clearly confounded by these familiar vocalisations, choosing to investigate rather than run.

At that moment, a margay emerged from the foliage walking down the trunk of a tree in a squirrel-like fashion, jumping down and then moving towards the monkeys. Realising the ruse, the sentinel screamed an alarm and sent the other tamarins fleeing.

“This means that accounts of jaguars and pumas using the same vocal mimicry to attract prey — but not yet recorded by scientists — also deserve investigation,” said Dr Avecita Chicchón, director of the WCS’s Latin America Programme.

Spices key to reducing greenhouse gas emissions
Curry spices such as coriander and turmeric could help cut down greenhouse gas emissions, according to a new study.

Research reveals that curry spices can reduce the amount of methane produced by sheep by up to 40 per cent.

Working a bit like an antibiotic, the spices were found to kill the methane-producing ‘bad’ bacteria in the animal’s gut even as the ‘good’ bacteria continued to flourish.

The findings are part of a study by Newcastle University research student Mohammad Mehedi Hasan and Dr Abdul Shakoor Chaudhry. “Spices have long been used safely by humans to kill bacteria and treat a variety of ailments — coriander seeds, for example, are often prescribed for stomach complaints while turmeric and cloves are strong antiseptics,” said Hasan.

He added: “Methane is a major contributor to global warming and the slow digestive system of ruminant animals such as cows and sheep makes them a key producer of the gas.”

“What my research found was that certain spices contain properties which make this digestive process more efficient so producing less waste — in this case, methane.”

Ciggie cravings result from habit, not addiction
A new study has shown that cravings from cigarettes arise from habit, and not addiction.
This may be the reason why nicotine patches and gum are often ineffective in curbing smoking.

Dr Reuven Dar of Tel Aviv University’s Department of Psychology found that the intensity of cravings for cigarettes had more to do with the psychosocial element of smoking than with the physiological effects of nicotine as an addictive chemical.

In a study conducted on flight attendants, the team found that craving levels at the end of each short flight were much higher those at the end of the long flight, demonstrating that cravings increased in anticipation of the flight landing, whatever the flight’s total duration.

Dar concluded that people smoke for short-term benefits like oral gratification, sensory pleasure and social camaraderie, not because they become ‘addicted’ to nicotine.