Swathed in greenery, Chopta is a picturesque hamlet and an offbeat holiday destination in Uttarakhand. It is perhaps one of the unexplored hill retreats situated in Chandra Parbat on Ukhimath-Gopeshwar Road. Chopta is famous for its green grasslands locally known as bugyals. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe entire area is enveloped in extensive expanses of dense and verdant forests, lush green slopes, gorges, occasional houses on the hilltops and snow-capped Himalayan pinnacles in the backdrop at an elevation of 2,900 metres.

Chopta is gradually gaining importance as a popular destination for trekking and camping. It is especially popular as the starting point of the trek to Tunganath Temple and Chandrashila Peak.

The Tunganath Temple, one among the Panch Kedar and the highest temple dedicated to Lord Shiva, is situated at an astounding elevation of 3,680 metres. It is at a distance of 3.5 km from Chopta that passes through beautiful mountain trails and is dotted with forests of pine, deodar and rhododendrons. The mountain peaks of Meru-Sumeru, Ganesh Parbat, Chaukhamba, Bandar Poonch, Neelkanth, Trishul and Nanda Devi provide a panoramic, 180-degree view of the greater Himalayan range from Tunganath.

The Chandrashila Peak lies 1.5 km further, and provides an invigorating view. The entire area from Chopta to Chandrashila is home to many beautiful birds such as Himalayan monal, woodpecker, hill perinea, golden eagle, speckled wood pigeon, snow pigeon and black bulbul. 

Another excursion near Chopta is the Deoria Tal. It can be reached by an easy trek of two kilometres from Sari village located on Ukhimath-Gopeshwar Road. Perched at an elevation of 2,438 metres, it is a lake holding pristine water amidst scenic landscape. The reflections of Chaukhamba peaks on the crystal clear water of Deoria Tal create a magical world. For a complete trekking experience you can collect firewood, fetch water from the lake and treat yourself with a steaming cup of tea during those odd breaks.

The Kanchula Korak Musk Deer Sanctuary is famous for breeding musk deer and is an ideal place for tourists who are looking for rare Himalayan Wildlife. 

There are not many hotels in Chopta. Resorts and hotels here don’t necessarily provide world class amenities, but one can find comfortable accommodation at an affordable price.