For last 40 years, the western cinema has given the world zombie movies in different genres like thriller or comic. Rise of Zombie will be India’s first ever zombie film which will take horror flicks in our country to another level ,” says Luke Kenny, director and actor of the movie. 

ADVERTISEMENTLuke Kenny is not a new name in tinsel town. He was last seen in Abhishek Kapoor’s Rock On, playing the role of Rob, a keyboardist. Before he turned a director in 2005 with his debut film 13th Floor – a short film that was critically appreciated and selected for international film festivals, Luke was seen on TV as a VJ, dancer and 
musician.

After a span of seven years, Luke has come up with his second movie and that too one-of-its-kind, horror-thriller. But why such a long gap? “My first film 13th floor was a small budget one. It started in an elevator and ended in it featuring only two actors. Whereas Rise of Zombie is a medium budget movie because those who have infused their money into the project are aware of the kind of horror flicks the audience want to see on screen.” 

Luke wanted to tap the idea properly so that the film would find the right audience.  “The idea of Zombie was at the back of my mind but took many years to develop,” says Luke. “The concept of zombie has never been explored in our country but countries like South Africa, Germany, France and others have their zombie movies.

 So, the idea was to be different and unique from the movies so far, which ultimately took time.”
Rise of Zombie is a film is about a human who experiences certain changes in life that seem to take his humanity away from him. Luke Kenny plays the role of a wildlife photographer and how circumstances transform him into a terrible blood-sucking monster.

Quiz him what is his favourite genre of films, Luke says, “It is always the story that matters. I don’t believe in conventional and unconventional concepts. Films are like music. If you are true music lover, you will love ballet, rock, pop, hip hop and everything that is good to hear.” 

In the meantime, Luke has been busy handling an international music channel and writing music columns in dailies. A musician, dancer, actor, director and programming head, which is the role Luke enjoys the most? “If you were to ask ‘water’ where do you enjoy most, being in mountains, ponds or in bottle? The answer will be ‘I am happy as long as I am water’. Similar is the case with me. I am an entertainer so films, music, dance and direction are all a part of it. I have moulded myself as an entertainer and feel happy to be a part of everything related to it,” says Luke.