Mysuru is known for the grandeur of the royal palace, serenity of the Chamundi hills and the famous Mysuru zoo. However, not known to many is its treasure of natural history. Located on the banks of Karanji lake, the Regional Museum of Natural History (RMNH) is a paradise for children and nature lovers. “The museum is an excellent place to understand and appreciate natural history. The public needs to engage with the museum more and more,” says Yogendra B S, Head of office and senior scientist, RMNH.

ADVERTISEMENTThe RMNH in Mysuru was inaugurated in 1995. Initially, it was launched as the National Museum of Natural History (NMNH) in New Delhi in 1972, with the aim to portray India’s flora, fauna and mineral treasure and to promote environmental awareness. NMNH then opened five other museums, Mysuru being one of them, extending its area of work. The other four are located in Bhopal (Central Region), Bhubaneswar (Eastern Region), Sawai Madhopur (Western Region) and Gangtok (North-Eastern Region). 

Varied display
When you enter the museum you will come across interesting temporary displays on contemporary themes. In a small hall near the entrance, you get flyers with beautiful museum logo, which gives you a good overview of the museum and information on the different sections of exhibits. The museum showcases many different galleries with many exhibits on biodiversity, ecology, evolution and conservation. 

The Mysuru museum’s galleries focus on Southern India’s biodiversity with special emphasis on the Western Ghats and there are excellent exhibits on the ecology and natural history. You will be amazed to see the diversity of plants and animals that are around us. Here, you could also get to know about the region’s geography and geology. The gallery also depicts ecological interrelationship among plants and animals with emphasis on conservation of nature and natural resources. The Tropical Rain Forests section has fascinating exhibits that deal with the adaptation and camouflage characters of various plants and animals of the region for their survival and its relation to the evolution of life. You also come to know its importance to the world by going through their role in biophysical processes and their vast genetic diversity. Another brilliant exhibit is the marine life where you get to know about its habitats and various life forms. There is also a huge scale model of a blue whale! There is an interesting display of evolution, where you can walk though a tunnel exploring the mysteries of life over space and time concluding with the emergence of modern man. 

The museum also has a small botanical garden with local flora used in Ayurvedic medicine. The beautiful trail has an interactive signboard for the visually-abled which enables them to touch and feel the different kinds of plants. You can also enjoy a walk on the sunken foot bridge to experience aquatic plants and fish. 

An interactive experience 
Apart from exhibits, displays, specimens and models, the museum has a discovery centre to activate various senses of the visitors, who may choose one or several activities provided. Activities and instruments at the museum offer an intense learning experience to children. In the Discovery Room, children are able to inspect specimens and discovery boxes  through interactive activities, and high school students can engross themselves in bioscience lab where they can get to know about biology-using computers. “The museum is visually spectacular and   enlightens knowledge seekers by its participatory vacation study programs, work shops and exhibitions. The specimens and exhibits at the museum always give an amazing experience,” says Sangamesh Mathad, a student. 

A mini theatre and sound booth are the other amenities offered to children to keep them engaged through fascinating activities that make them learn with fun. The multimedia techniques provide them an entirely new experience of learning about nature through interactive facilities. The museum has a huge library with  books on botany, zoology, geology, museology, biology, and environmental science, natural history and other subjects. Films related to natural history, especially the ones on wildlife, are screened at its theatre everyday at 12 pm to 1 pm and 4 pm to 5 pm. The museum provides a unique opportunity to explore nature and the natural world through a sagacious mix of models, translates, AV aid, diorama, thematic, interactive and participatory exhibits. The museum periodically organises workshops on various nature topics like protecting the environment and camps for students and enthusiasts. 

The museum is open between 10 am and 5 pm on all days, except Mondays and national holidays. Entry to the museum is free.