Individuals owning elephants cannot use them for begging, performance or procession in any form, according to new guidelines issued by the Department of Forest, Environment and Ecology. 

The guidelines on the management and maintenance of privately owned elephants in Karnataka came into effect on September 11, 2017. 

The guidelines also govern the use of elephants for cultural and religious purposes, including Dasara. Accordingly, whenever an elephant is taken out for a procession, a veterinarian and tranquilliser must be kept ready while the superintendent of police must be present to ensure security, P Ravikumar, the additional chief secretary of the department, said. 

The guidelines stipulate maintaining the details (length and girth) of tusks, recording and dating them every April. Owners of tuskers should write to the chief wildlife warden for permission to cut or shape the tusks. The task should be carried out in the presence of a range forest officer and forest veterinarian. The owner will be intimated of the reasons for rejection, if any, of permission. 

Captive elephants under government custody are not subject to any unnatural conditions that lead to unnatural behaviour and health situations. They are conditioned to situations before being used for performing tasks such as taking part in processions and government events such as Mysuru Dasara, Independence Day and Republic Day. The government has issued specific orders for allowing departmental elephants to participate in these events.  

The guidelines were submitted to the High Court of Karnataka on September 11. The court, hearing a writ petition (4610/2013), had directed the authorities to formulate guidelines for prohibiting the use of elephants in any form for begging, performance or procession.

Based on the directions given by the Supreme Court to all states on November 23, 2015, Karnataka directed the principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife) and the chief wildlife warden on January 21, 2016, to finalise the guidelines. The government formed a committee under Additional PCCF (Wildlife), C Jayaram. The committee met on May 6 and 18, 2016.

 ADVERTISEMENT