Addressing a talk on “Need for CRZ” on Monday in Mangalore at a State-level workshop, Prof Choudhury said that coastal zone is one of the most productive and richest habitat on earth, and hence is an asset of incalculable value to coastal nations. Coastal Zone has high density of population due to availability of all resources, 2/3rd of the world’s biggest cities are located in coast. Due to the sensitivity, ecological significance and richness of the coastal zone, there is a need to safeguard it. 

“The nature has so much to offer to human race. It is not the legacy that we have received from our ancestors but it is something that we have borrowed from our future generation, which we need to give back to them safe and sound,” he said and added that changing demographic nature redefines the impact on exploitation of resources. One can see that fishing has undergone drastic change over last 50 years. 

He said that the new developmental activities such as mining of sand dunes for minerals, invasive and alien vegetation plantation for creation of shelter belt, captive ports by industries, hydrocarbon exploration with no environmental safeguards and social concerns and proposed SEZ in coastal sensitive areas are posing threat to coastal biodiversity and livelihood.  Citing an example of a movement in Gujarat, he said that Gujarat government took up the task of safeguarding the Dolphin Sharks, which come to the Western coastline for breeding. The project was a huge success and over 70 dolphin sharks have been released back to sea after they were caught in the fishing net.

He said that most development process change the system irreversibly. Development is important but there is need to maintain ecological process of the system too. Coastal Zone development and management depends on relationship between the people who are living in the region, the policy makers and the members of scientific community. 

Earlier, inaugurating the programme, MLA Yogish Bhat said that though there are certain organisations, which make hue and cry about industries coming into the region, they must understand that at this juncture of time, there is need for employment generation too. Hence, a solution should be found to see to it that development happens without much harm to nature.  MLA U T Khader, Western Ghat Task Force President Ananth Hegade Asisara, Nagarika Seva Trust President Somnath Nayak among others were present.ADVERTISEMENT