The first-ever public hearing conducted by Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) along with Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) on Thursday to discuss setting up of Solid Waste Management (SWM) processing unit in Banashankari 6th Stage ran into trouble. 

ADVERTISEMENTEven before the hearing could start, local residents protested at Banashankari VI Stage, V Block, near Metkalpalya village, where the hearing was organised. The members from Banashankari VI Stage Residents’ Welfare Association (RWA) said they have got a stay from National Green Tribunal (NGT) Court, Chennai for the Thursday's hearing.

“The stay order says that the KPSCB and the BBMP cannot hold any hearing,” said vice president of the association, Manjunath S K. However, as the association did not have the copy of the order, the hearing went on. 

Vijay Kumar, BBMP official from the South Zone, said: “The public hearing was completed successfully. We had announced about the hearing a month ago itself. As the association did not have the order copy, we continued.”

The association said it will submit the copy on Friday itself. The members also condemned the BBMP for building the unit and bringing in a few machines at waste processing unit, without informing them. “The hearing should have been held before implementing the project. They are involving citizens now after installing some machines,” Manjunath added. 

Three cases have been filed by Banashankari VI Stage RWA at NGT. According to the association, the cases have been filed against Palike for setting up the unit and not informing them prior to the implementation of the project.

President of the association, T S Mahesh said they have been fighting the case since July last, when the Palike proposed the project. “The waste unit was set up eight   months ago and neither the Palike nor the KSPCB consulted us. About 25,000 houses and eight villages surrounding the plant will be affected if it becomes operational. Flora and fauna of nearby BM Kaval forest will be jeopardised,” he added. 

Meanwhile, the association and villagers submitted the petition against the BBMP urging the Palike officials to protect the wildlife at BM Kaval and Thurahalli forest. T S mahesh, president, RWA: The waste unit was set up eight months ago and neither the Palike nor the KSPCB consulted us. About 25,000 houses and eight villages surrounding the plant will be affected if it becomes operational. Flora and fauna of nearby BM Kaval forest will be jeopardised.