Gandabherunda (royal insignia of erstwhile rulers of Mysore), howdah elephant, Nandi atop Chamundi Hill, Statue Circle (Chamarajendra Wadiyar circle)and now aane gaadi (elephant drawn cart with musicians on board).

ADVERTISEMENTThe District Horticulture Society is recreating aane gaadi using one lakh flowers majority of them roses as part of flower show at Curzon Park adjacent to Palace in the city.

Announcing this to media here on Saturday, vice-president of the society Dr D Prabhamandal said the flower show for the year will be open from October 16 up to October 25 from 9 am to 9 pm. As is the tradition to plan for unique attraction every year, the attraction this year will be aane gaadi. In addition to this, ‘Shivaliga’ of 20,000 flowers is also being readied.

On aane gaadi, Prabhamandal said that it has remained a part of jamboo savari the last leg of Dasara since the period of rule of Nalwadi Krishnaraja Wadiyar in the year 1920. In its primitive year, the cart consisting all time great musicians Veene Seshanna, Veene Subbanna, Veene Venkatagiri and also violinist Shivarudrappa, mridanga Kittanna among 24 artistes was pulled by an elephant. In the recent years, Karnataka Police Band occupies the aane gaadi.

The flower show will be formed of 35,000 to 40,00 pots with different flowers from the various divisions of horticulture department , besides Ooty and K R Sagar, Mysore City Corporation, Palace Board, different factories and also organisations.

Entry fee

The entry fee remains at Rs 10, while for school students who come in uniforms it will be free. For the visitors have to pay separate fee for cameras, fixed at Rs 50 and for video cameras it will be Rs 200. 

 Apart from the existing contests like gardening, vegetable carving, drawing, flower rangoli and Indian floral art, the society this year has added three new contests in the categories of photography (regarding flower show), environmental photography and also wildlife. 

Private nurseries, various government and semi-government agencies, JSS Krishi Vignana Kendra, Suttur, Horticulture College, Mysore too are participating in the contests. The entry fee for each contests is Rs 20. Parking arrangements have been made at Vishnuvardhan Park opposite Curzon park.