The Zilla Panchayat Standing Committee presidents here have demanded an equal distribution of Rs 25 crore funds among 29 constituencies. The funds will be released by the state government for the development of roads in Kodagu district. 

ADVERTISEMENTRaising the issue at the KDP monthly review meeting here on Tuesday, standing committee president Viju Subramani said, “A few ZP members have levelled allegations that I have taken up development works worth Rs 10 lakh in my constituency while others did not get funds for development works.” He stated that the funds released by the state government for road development works should be distributed equally among all the members. 

Agriculture and Industry Standing Committee president Srinivas said there should not be any discrimination. The list of roads for development should be prepared in the presence of ZP members. 

The Standing Committee presidents urged ZP president Harish and Deputy Commissioner Richard Vincent D’Souza to share the funds equally among the members. The DC however, stated that he had no information on the release of funds but insisted that, “Emphasis would be laid on the development of the entire 
district and no discrimination would be meted out with regard to release of funds.” 
 
Deputy Commissioner admitted that there had been a decline in the progress of the district. The development works are not moving in an expected pace, he lamented. 

“Out of Rs 17 crore in the Zilla panchayat, only Rs 5 crore has been spent so far,” he said and added that works on construction of sheds and roads have not been taken up under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme. 

Stating that a few villages had been reeling under a severe water crisis in the district, the Deputy Commissioner said that  water supply needs to be regularised on priority. The Deputy Commissioner informed that the state government has banned drilling of borewells and stated that these can be sunk only for drinking water purpose by the government. 

Standing Committee president Srinivas said that a shortage of doctors at Kushalnagar hospital is affecting patients here. He urged the DHO to deploy specialist doctors to Kushalnagar. DHO Dr O R Srirangappa stated that under the National Health Mission, 11 staff nurses would be recruited soon. 

Speaking on the occasion ITDP in-charge officer Mayadevi Galagali mentioned that, “Majjigehalli elephant camp comes under wildlife division where infrastructure facilities cannot be provided. As a result, no permission is given for taking up development works here.” 

The DC expressed concern over a decline in paddy cultivation in the district and exhorted the authorities to support the cause. Agriculture department Joint Director Ramappa said, “Farm equipment was being given at a subsidised rate but a shortage of labourers had been affecting paddy cultivation here.”

Srinivas stated that a report submitted to the government by the authorities was far from true as it was mentioned that crops on 3,500 hectares land had dried owing to scanty rainfall. However, the agriculture department joint director clarified that the report stated that 11,750 hectare paddy had dried in the district.

Kannada Sahitya Parishat district unit president Lokesh Sagar apprised the DC about shop-owners not adhering to government’s direction of displaying Kannada signboards. The DC instructed owners to adhere to the government’s direction on Kannada name boards. 
DH News Service