A protest against the state government may be triggered at Chief Minister Siddaramaiah’s home district.

ADVERTISEMENTHundreds of Mysureans are joining hands to oppose the government’s proposed construction activities atop Chamundi Hill.

The government has proposed projects like multi-level parking, shopping complexes, guest houses, widening of road and others. While many organisations, individuals and environmentalists are marking their opposition by staging protests and planting saplings, a large number of organisations and prominent individuals are coming together to intensify the opposition against the government’s move.

Let’s do it! Mysore, an NGO, Mysore Grahakara Parishat (MGP), Mysore Travel Agents Association and others are launching a programme ‘Chamundi Betta Ulisi’ and a protest march is organised on Sunday from the foot, near the steps of the hill.

Writer S L Bhyrappa will flag off the march at 7 am. Former India cricketer Javagal Srinath, wildlife photographers B S Krupakar and Senani Hegde, retired Major General Vombatkere and other well-known personalities will take part in the march. Nearly 5,000 volunteers from more than 100 organisations are expected to participate in the event. The agitators will wear black dress to show concern and to express their support to preserve the hill.

MGP founder president Bhamy Shenoy said, the state government has planned several projects atop the hill by violating forest norms. Though the forest department has declined development activities atop the hill, which comes under Reserved Forest, the government has bypassed the norms, he alleged. 

“In 1929, the Chamundi Hill was declared as Reserve Forest and as per the Forest Conservation Act, 1980, permission should be taken from the Conservator of Forest, to take up any activity inside the reserve forest,” he points out.

According to the norms, the prevailing standard is a minimum of 33 per cent of forest cover, but Mysuru district which houses a national park, wildlife sanctuaries and parks, has only 15.6% forest, he said.

“We will hold a campaign on the lines of a campaign being held at Dakshina Kannada to oppose the Yettinahole project. We will ask people not to support political parties, which support construction activities atop the hill. The hill houses rare flora and fauna and so, development by creating a concrete jungle will hasten their extinction. The chirping of birds, quietness up the stairs and religiosity offer a break from the weariness,” said Shenoy.

B S Prashanth of Safe Wheels Tours and Travels said, “We don’t need development or widening of the road, instead, the government should focus on keeping the hill cleaner, preserving its environment, greening the area and reduce the flow of traffic to the minimum to maintain its serenity”.

Jayakumar of Mysore Travel Agents Association (MTAA) said, the government’s move will definitely help travel agents in terms of business but, it will take away the beauty of the hill and create an unhealthy environment.

“The association will oppose such projects. Instead of widening the road, let the government ban private vehicles atop the hill and strengthen KSRTC services,” he said.

The activists urge the government to take up a long-term plan to develop greenery atop the hill. It is true that a large part of the hill is rocky area. Still it is possible for afforestation using innovative practices developed for such difficult terrain, they point out.