Kudremukh Iron Ore Company Ltd (KIOCL) proposing to enter the eco-tourism sector using its existing infrastructure at Kudremukh is suspicious and should not be allowed, said Wild Cat - C and Bhadra Conservation Trust office-bearers.

Opposing KIOCL's proposal, Environmentalists Shridevi Hulikere, D V Girish and State Wildlife Board Member S Girijashankar pointed out that the company has caused large - scale devastation by its mining activities for over 30 years. The area is still recovering from the damage and is sensitive. The government should not accept the proposal as tourism activities may affect the area, they said.

Kudremukh area plays an important role in creating ecological balance. It should be noted that an association called Wild Life First Approached the Supreme Court and brought a stay in the mining activities. The association provided proof to the Supreme Court that the beautiful Kudremukh is turning into an industrial hub.

KIOCL had continued its mining activities even after six years of its contract expiration. The contract expired in 1999 July. The mining work stopped after the Supreme Court order in 2005.ADVERTISEMENT However, one should note that the company has not shifted the heavy machinery. The ore filtering unit is still maintained. Hence, even after eight years after the operations have stopped, the Company has kept its existence alive in the area. 

The environmentalists said that the company still survives on the land that does not belong to them. The Government should take steps against this, they demanded.
The company is proposing to spend over Rs 800 crore on the 600 square kilometre Kudremukh range which does not belong to them. Such huge investment is suspicious and unnecessary, said the environmentalist associations.

The State Government should not fall prey to the KIOCL proposal. The company should completely stop functioning in Kudremukh and shift from the place.The delicate Kudremukh region needs to heal completely. Eco-tourism can pose threat to the plant and animal life in the region, they said.