Mysuru Road, the State highway connecting the Bengaluru and Mysuru, has huge tourism potential with its good number of sightseeing places, according to a recent survey.  

ADVERTISEMENTAs part of the thesis on ‘potential areas of tourism in BBMP and its hinterland using Geographic Information System (GIS) - an eco-friendly approach,’ Dr K N Amarendra, associate professor, Siddaganga First Grade College of Arts and Commerce, Nelamangala, carried out an evaluation of existing and potential destinations in the city.

As part of the evaluation, about 25 tourists from different places were asked to rate seven potential tourism zones such as Mysuru Road, Magadi Road, Tumakuru Road, Chikkaballapur Road, Kolar Road, Hosur Road and Kanakapura Road. The parameters that were considered for rating included infrastructure, climatic conditions and accessibility.
“Mysuru Road has been ranked first followed by Chikkaballapur Road, Kanakapura Road, Hosur Road, Tumakuru Road, Kolar Road and Magadi Road. Tourists have shown more interest towards Mysuru Road as it connects to Mysuru, one of the important tourist places in India. Similarly, Chikkaballapur Road with Puttenahalli lake, Devanahalli fort and Ghati Subramanya temple is the second most popular tourist zone,” said Amarendra.
Followed by the evaluation and ratings, Amarendra - with the support of his guide Dr Ashok D Hanjagi from Bangalore University - made GIS mapping of each of the above zones listing out tourism categories such as heritage structures, museums, religious places, hospitals, cultural places and wildlife spots. 

“The tourism spots are located in a 25-30 km radius of each zone. While Mysuru Road has rich tourism places such as Wonder La, Bidadi Innovative Film City, Gali Anjaneya temple, Rajarajeshwari temple and Sankey tank, Kanakapura Road has rich wildlife,” said Amarendra. 

He said that the Palike Horticulture department could develop parks located at the above zones as tourism destinations. 

“Boating and ticket facilities can be introduced at Sankey Tank, JP Park and various other lung spaces. This way, the Palike can boost its revenue as well as attract visitors,” Amarendra said.

The research paper for which Amarendra has been awarded the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy from Bangalore University has explored  medical tourism destinations of the city as well. 

Narayana Hrudayalaya, Nimhans, Sparsha hospital, Narayana Nethralaya and others have been rated as top medical tourist destinations. Amarendra plans to bring out a book based on his comprehensive thesis soon.