Ahead of the Dasara High-Power Committee meeting, scheduled to be held in Bengaluru on Monday, Deputy Commissioner D Randeep conducted a preliminary meeting with officials, at his office here on Friday.

The officials of Mysuru City Corporation (MCC), Mysuru Urban Development Authority (MUDA), Forest department, City Police, Public Works Department and others submitted a proposal for required funds for Dasara celebrations.

The DC said, he would place the proposal before the High-Power Committee, scheduled to be chaired by Chief Minister Siddaramaiah, for approval. Randeep asked the officials concerned to avoid unnecessary expenditures. While the MCC has asked for Rs 65 lakh, the Forest department and City Police have asked for Rs 66 lakh and Rs 2 crore, respectively.

Deputy Commissioner of Police (Traffic and Crime) Vikram Amte said, this time, the Police department has planned a laser show during the torch-light parade, which was stopped two years back. The department has asked for Rs 2 crore for the laser show, and law and order purpose, he said.

The DC asked the Deputy Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) V Yedukondalu to organise Gajapayana — the journey of Dasara elephants from the forests towards Mysuru to participate in the Jamboo Savari on Vijayadashami — in a grand manner. Till last year, only a few officials, people’s representatives and, mahouts and kaavadis would participate in Gajapayana. Randeep asked the DCF to make arrangements for participation of tourists in the event.

CESC asks for 50% fund
Chamundeshwari Electricity Supply Corporation (CESC), which makes illumination for Dasara, sought at least 50% of the expenses. It may be mentioned that last time, the CESC has invested Rs 72 lakh, but did not get funds from the government. 

An official said, CESC had raised funds from sponsors and this time, it would be difficult for them to get sponsorship. Only LED lights will be used for illumination of roads, circles and buildings, to save electricity, during Dasara, the officials said.

Pending funds
Randeep said, the state government is yet to release Rs 6.40 crore that was sanctioned for Dasara-2016. “The Dasara Committee owes money to a few departments, which have invested on Dasara festival last year. Except unaccounted amount, all major amount will be settled soon,” the DC said.

To the Police department, the government owes Rs 33 lakh. The department had asked for Rs 2 crore for the previous Dasara, but the government sanctioned Rs 1.35 crore and released only Rs 1.2 crore.ADVERTISEMENT