The Kudremukh range casts an instant spell on visitors, thanks to its misty hills, vast expanse of dense forest, and lush green slopes of coffee and tea plantations. Kudremukh is an ideal weekend destination.

ADVERTISEMENTKudremukh is situated 95 km south-west of Chikmagalur. The name is derived from the horse-faced shape of the peak. The Kudremukh range lies along the Arabian Sea and the hills are connected to each other with deep ravines and precipices.

It was nearly six in the evening when we reached Kudremukh. The next morning was spent trekking and exploring the verdant forest range of Kudremukh, and taking in breathtaking views of the region from different vantage points. Though relatively unexplored, the Kudremukh region is gradually gaining importance among nature lovers and wildlife enthusiasts.

It boasts of a vast variety of flora and fauna at an altitude of 1,894 metres. If you are lucky, you may be able to spot a wide variety of bird life and wild life too in this range. 

Trekking in Gangamoola can also be an unforgettable experience as you walk through dense jungles, cross rivers, streams and cascading waterfalls. It is a dazzling locale within the bounds of the Kudremukh National Park. There are 13 trails in Kudremukh, and Gangamoola is an interesting one. Trekkers need to seek permission from the Forest Department for taking up trekking trips here. You could also trek to the source of River Bhadra, visit the Bhagavathy temple and the Varaha cave as part of your trip. There is a 1.8-metre-tall image of Varaha inside the cave. This hill range is also famous for being a source of rivers — Tunga, Bhadra and Netravathy.

Another attraction in the surroundings of the Kudremukh National Park is Hanumagundi waterfalls. Hanumagundi is a calm locale, far from the madding crowd, where one can enjoy the scenic beauty. 

Even though Kudremukh enjoys a pleasant temperature for most part of the year, the best season to visit is between October and May. Spring is the best time to visit — the sky remains clear and there is a nip in the air.