When it comes to wildlife protection, there is a famous saying, “Shoot with the camera not with the gun”. Similarly, there is a saying to protect forest fires, “A tree produces millions of matchsticks, but a matchstick can destroy a million trees”. Quite true, sheer negligence causes irreparable loss to our ecological balance.

ADVERTISEMENTAccording to a report by the NGO, Delhi Greens, the economic value of a healthy tree with respect to its oxygen producing capacity is roughly Rs 23.72 lakh per year.

The study is titled ‘Report on Economic Valuation of Oxygen Supplying Ecosystem Service of Healthy Trees.’ It claims that the study is based on the fact that an average adult at rest inhales 7-8 litres of air per minute which means about 11,000 litres of air per day. Of this, about 20% is oxygen, and nearly 15% is exhaled.

“Therefore, a person consu-mes about 550 litres of pure oxygen per day. Based on a market survey, it was found that the average cost of a 2.75 litre port-able oxygen cylinder is Rs 6,500. At this rate, a human consumes oxygen worth about Rs 13 lakh per day,” the report said.

Govind Singh, Director, Delhi Greens, said: “The value of a tree is priceless. We were forced to put a price tag on them because the system is hell bent on cutting them and the only way to make them realise is through monetary terms.” The report has used oxygen cylinder rates to quantify oxygen from trees.

Some of the benefits trees give to the ecological balance and to mankind include: One acre of trees annually consumes the amount of carbon dioxide equivalent to that produced by driving a car for 26,000 miles. Trees placed around buildings can reduce air conditioning needs by 30%.

Further, trees in cities deflect the sunlight reducing the heat island effect caused by pavements and commercial buildings. Over the course of its life, a single tree can absorb one tonne of carbon dioxide. Trees reduce UV-B (harmful ultraviolet rays) exposure by about 50%, thus providing protection to children on school campuses and playgrounds and the list is endless.

While Bengaluru city is trying its best to beat traffic snarls and delays, it appears the options are limited. The IT city has exploded making it one of the fastest growing cities that none could think of in such a short span.

Recall those days, down the memory lane of over three decades. There was no dearth of land, it was just unoccupied, vacant lands, be it be of the land belonging to the defence ministry, Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs), private educational institutions etc.

Over times, as Bengaluru grew, efforts were made to match the growing demands of the burgeoning city but in vain as it could not match the speed. The imbalance and the gap began to widen and roads were no exception.

The land belonging to the defence units and other establishments and organisations which were allotted vacant land in different parts of Bengaluru way back in early 1970s, are now among the most prime locations of the city. In this context, while the important units of defence can still remain in the main Bengaluru city, other units such as stores, archives, old and discarded armory, jeep, bus and truck garages etc can easily be relocated on to the outskirts of the city.

Expansion of roads

On the same lines, some of the institutions can also give way for expansion of roads falling close to their vacant land without affecting the functioning of their school or college. The government can, in turn, compensate the loss of the land.

In the given situation, it’s time now for the colleges, defence, PSU units etc in Bengaluru to come forward and provide at least some pathway or realign their boundary walls wherever there are public roads.

Now, as the city has grown, almost every road is saturated and cannot take any more traffic. Bengaluru has one of the highest number of one-way roads in the country and if you are a new comer to the city and driving for the first time, you are left totally confused.

The worst hit are regular office commuters, ambulances, patients of chronic diseases with regular treatments, fire tenders, those attending interviews, examinations, conferences, events, those going to catch flights, trains and buses, tourists etc.

Coming to the controversial proposal of steel flyover and the events which have unfolded over the past few weeks, it is pertinent to mention that technology comes to your rescue in saving our precious environment and you can easily relocate trees instead of razing them.

Many countries are relocating full grown trees without cutting them. Log on, search for tree relocation, and you can watch videos on this. It does not cost a fortune to relocate these trees and can very well be taken care of by the government.

There is of course, a need for conviction and love for trees by the government and even the citizens to make Bengaluru green and congestion-free, and plan well for the future needs.