The two-day affair is organised in response to the felt need of the smaller group of elected representatives along with experts and other informed individuals to discuss indepth the eight topics that concern these elected bodies and draft resolutions for the final day conclave.  

With the purpose to increase the understanding through sharing the knowledge and experiences of all the participants, this conference aims at focused debate from the view point of Panchayat members as well as their constituencies regarding the constitutional provisions, Karnataka Panchayat Raj Act and prevalent practices. Besides, the two day sessions also aim to arrive at viable proposals coupled with plans of actions for their realisation.

The issues that were discussed on the first day include  “issues of remote, tribal and backward panchayats,” “the concerns of town and semi urban panchayats,” “right of self determination: participation of vulnerable groups” and “living together in peace and harmony”. 

The debate over “issues of remote, tribal and backward panchayats” concentrated on the basic idea of tribal people who are deprived of modernity. The impact of Forest Right Act on tribal community and the atrocities committed by the forest officials against tribal people in the name of encroachment of forest lands was discussed on the occasion. 

Untouchablity was the other issue that was concentrated upon. Besides the effects of 
Rastriya Udyanavana Yojana and the recent introduction of Wildlife Conservation Act-2010 for saving tigers which has created more problems to the tribal people was discussed in the meet. 

Speaking on the occasion, Institute of Social Sciences Senior Fellow Dr Manu Kulkarni opined that Forest Department is the great enemy of the tribal people. 

“They harass these innocents. There is a need for stringent measures to strictly implement Forest Right Act,” he added.

In the second session that was organised under the theme “the concerns of town and semi urban panchayats,” the issues were concentrated on permission and approval by the Gram Panchayat and Gram Sabha before setting up of any industrial project in the area. 

Earlier, speaking at the inaugural ceremony, MLC Kota Srinivas Poojary stressed on the need for political will for democratic decentralisation. He said there are as many as 5628 GPs across the state with nearly 94000 members. These members should unite together and help change the society, he added.
ADVERTISEMENT