Asserting that tiger conservation was not a “drag on development”, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Tuesday said infrastructure projects passing through protected forests can integrate safeguards for wildlife.

ADVERTISEMENT“All we need is to re-orient our strategy by factoring in the concerns of the tiger in sectors where tiger conservation is not the goal. Our genius lies in smartly integrating the tiger and wildlife safeguards in various infrastructures at the landscape level,” Modi said here at the Asian ministerial conference on tiger conservation.

While the prime minister did not allude to any specific project, his comments come at a time when courts are hearing petitions from conservationists against infrastructure projects inside forests including the expansion of the national highway-7 (Kanha-Pench corridor) that pierces a dense forest.

Construction of multiple large and wide underpasses for animal movement across the forested stretches of the NH-7, is being discussed within the government and before the courts for the last five years, but there is no decision yet.

The underpasses were planned as mitigation measures required to counter the anticipated ecological damage that may arise from widening the highway, which is under the government's consideration.

The smart integration, Modi said, would lead to the much-needed “smart green infrastructure”, while adopting a landscape approach.

“The landscape approach would also help us involve business groups through corporate social responsibility for various initiatives towards tiger conservation. In the Indian context, we intend to achieve this through the Tiger Conservation Plans,” he said.

The ministerial conference is happening against the backdrop of the first-ever report of increase in the global tiger population in the last 100 years. The global tiger count has gone up to 3,890 in 2015 – up from 3,200 in 2010 – and India contributes the maximum.
India's tiger count stands at 2,226, as per the latest official survey carried out in 2014 while Russia holds the second highest number of wildcats at 433.

“India houses nearly 70% of the world's tiger population. In the last two years, the number has been rising and our rough estimate is that we have nearly 2,500 tigers,” said Union Environment Minister Prakash Javadekar.