Winged visitors coming to Rajasthan are a troubled lot these days. While seasonal habitats are shrinking and succumbing to rapid urbanisation and industrial development, the two major wet lands--Keoladeo Bird Sanctuary in Bharatpur district and Sambhar Lake in Sambhar--are also under threat, raising doubts about the arrival of migratory birds in the years to come. Massive developments in Rajasthan coupled with natural shortcomings are posing a severe threat to most habitats of the migratory birds in the state.

ADVERTISEMENTThe delay in arrival of migratory birds in Rajasthan and the scanty rainfall in the Bharatpur division have raised serious concerns over the future of Keoladeo 
National Park and Bird Sanctuary. 

“This season, Keoladeo National Park has not received much water. By August 31, the park needed nearly 250 million cubic feet (mcft) water for larvae, fish and other prey for the birds to develop or grow ahead of the migratory season,” said a senior forest official. For more than a decade now, Siberian cranes have given the Keoladeo National Park a miss. Due to shortage of water and insufficient feed, more birds may skip Keoladeo, he feared. 

Earlier, a little over 40 mcft of water was received from the Chambal River but Keoladeo National Park needs 550 mcft of water to support resident and migratory species throughout winter. “The pumps that bring Chambal’s water run only three or four hours a day whereas there is an urgent need for pumping water 24 hours for at least 15 days in a month,” said an official in the park.

A shocking role reversal has occurred in Keoladeo Park-- one that has drastically altered the food chain and even state forest department seems to be clueless on how to deal with this problem. Catfish was  introduced outside the park in 2006-07 to provide additional livelihood opportunities to locals. It has now turned a predator in the park and swallowing birds. 

Officials noticed it in 2008-09 when they saw the bulging bellies of the fish. Further, investigations revealed that the fish was eating small birds on marshy land or in water bodies. It also spread to the remote areas of the park. Efforts to weed it out has not yielded results. 

Sambhar Lake, spread over 1,518 hectares across the districts of Nagaur, Ajmer and Sikar, is the largest saltwater lake in Asia and the presence of salt-tolerant algae makes the lake one of the most important wintering areas for flamingos, after the Rann of Kutch. Both Phoniconaias Minor (Lesser Flamingo) and Phoenicopterus Roseus (Greater Flamingo) come here during winters.

The number of these birds has fallen drastically in the past two decades beca­use of overextraction of subsurface brine from the lake and pollution caused by 
illegal salt-making units. According to wildlife experts, there were 5,00,000 flamingoes in 1982-83 and the number has fallen to 20,000 in 2008. Now, there may be just a few hundred.

A number of illegal salt mining units too have mushroomed in the past decade. A petition to save Sambhar lake, filed in the Supreme Court ,said that 15-20 illegal borewells are operating in every 3,000 sq yards. About 250 borewells were identified only in one part of lake in Nagaur district. Also, 10,000-odd tractors are used in illegal mining in the same area for carrying extracted salt. The petitioner has accused salt manufacturers of sinking unauthorised borewells around the lake and laying pipelines that sometimes extend several km into the lake.

A mega solar project is also underway near Sambhar Lake. Chief Minister Vasundhara Raje has written to the Centre that Sambhar is a place for migratory birds and any project in the area may damage its prospect. The government is now coming up with a master plan to conserve and save Sambhar Lake.  

Pachpadra lake in Barmer has been attracting migratory birds for last few years. But, the proposed refinery will be a major disturbance for birds. The issue was raised several times by BJP MP from Barmer, Col Sonaram Chaudhary. However, the forest department argues that the water body is not a notified place.

“Desert Park in Jaisalmer is the only notified place in western Rajasthan where migratory birds come in winter. Many times, a patch of land becomes wet or marshy due to excess rains and starts attracting birds. But such places are temporary abode for birds,” said an official.

The number of Lesser Floricans and Houbara Bustards coming to western Rajasthan too has decreased significantly. “From several thousands, the number of Lesser Floricans has reduced y to 1,500-2,000. Wetlands are shrinking due to urbanisation and industrial development. Besides, these birds are hunted in West Asia and Afghanistan,” said a 
senior forest official posted in Jodhpur division. 

Officials said that a few patches of wet land in catchment areas of big dams in Rajasthan and those in western Rajas­than that hold religious significance, remain undeveloped with no artificial disturba­nce. Such places, over the years, have emerged as preferred destination for birds. Ramdevra in Jaisalmer, Chambal and Bisalpur dam are a few among them.

Wildlife experts say increasing wind energy farms in Jaisalmer and nearby areas may also impact the free movement of migratory birds in western Rajasthan. Several incidents of birds colliding with the big blades of windmill and dying have been reported. The problem is not so grave but expansion in solar and wind energy sectors is likely to pose more threat to birds.