Prashanth Swaminathan discovered his interest in photography during a college competition. He tagged along with a friend who had a camera, without knowing the basics of how to work the gadget. After college, he decided to try his hand at wielding the camera and thus his journey began. He speaks to Anila Kurian about his expeditions and plans. 

Why did you choose photography?

My friend was into wildlife photography and I just tagged along with him. But when I decided to try my hand at it, I joined a photography group that taught me everything. I joined them on photo walks and travelled places with him. It was their interest in observing others and learning the technique that led me to where I am now. 

Tell us about your genre of photography.

I love travel photography. When I completed college, I did a few documentaries. One my favourite is the transgender festival that takes place in Tamil Nadu. Though it is an annual festival, I wanted to focus on how it is losing its charm. It used to be a festival to assert the transgenders’ lives and pride. But since a lot of people know about it now, it has become more of a tourist location. People are diluting the authenticity of the festival. That was my focus and travel photography has helped me do that. 

Some of the places you have travelled to. 

I’ve been to Varanasi, Kerala, Shivamogga, Goa, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu. Like any other photographer, I want to visit Leh and learn about the culture there. 

A dream location you want to visit? 

I want to visit Cambodia one day. Many become a fan of the place after going there, but with the research I have done, I am already in love with it.

Some of the difficulties you have faced while travelling. 

I’ve realised that local people ask a lot of questions when we go for photo walks, especially if you travel to North India. Not everyone understands that we are freelance photographers who want to capture different aspects of the location. Thankfully, we will have someone along who can speak the language to calm the situation.

Your favourite picture. 

Many consider this picture a ‘street photography’ picture but this happened during one of my expeditions with my camera. At Marina Beach, I saw a fisherman who was back on shore, separating the fishes from the net. It is a picture where the fish looked like they are popping out of the sea and pulling at the hook. I love this picture because I know this moment can never be recreated.

What are your plans for the future?

I am completing my Visual Communication course right now. I want to work as a content writer and with whatever money I make, I want to travel the world. 

One thing that you practise every day. 

I’ve learnt this from another photographer I met during photo walks. You might go out for pictures twice, thrice a week, but it is important to post process a couple of pictures every single day. It’s good to inculcate that habit so that it makes your work easier in the future.