The apex court accordingly directed the Karnataka government to charge royalty as per the market value and use the money for the rehabilitation of the damaged area.

A Bench headed by Chief Justice S H Kapadia said it would grant the public sector company permission to mine only as an interim measure till a complete “reclamation and rehabilitation” plan to repair the damages caused to the environment was put in place.

The Court gave the task of preparing environment impact assessment (EIA) study to Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education (ICFRE), in collaboration with Wildlife Institute of India, and other experts, in consultation with Ministry of Environment and Forest, with regard to Bellary district.

“In order to balance the environmental concerns with economic development and keeping in mind the mandate of Article 21 (right to life and liberty) of the Constitution, including inter-generational equity, we are of the view that in extra-ordinary circumstances, NMDC alone be allowed to operate it’s mines to the extent of providing one million tonnes per month commencing from 6th August, 2011,” the bench . also comprising Justices Aftab Alam and Swatanter Kumar , said.

Directing the MoEF to frame a detailed ‘Terms of Reference’ for the proposed EIA study within one week, the Court said the macro-level study would also indicate whether the district of Bellary constituted one single environmental unit or more than one unit with different degrees of environmental degradation.

In a strong message, the Court had on July 29 suspended the mining activities in Bellary district saying that the extraction of iron ore would not be allowed as precautionary principle at the cost of environment degradation.

The court’s order, which lifted the ban on mining partially, however, clarified, “no part of this production shall be exported outside India till further orders. NMDC will sell the production to the States in consultation with Ministry of Steel, Government of India.”
It further asked the Karnataka government, to submit the “reclamation and rehabilitation” plan for Bellary district, within three months.

Representing Federation of Indian Mineral Industry, senior advocate Dushyant Dave strongly opposed the court’s decision to grant permission of mining solely to the state-run company, saying that it was tantamount to nationalisation. But he could not impress upon the bench,  which reminded the counsel of “corporate social responsibility” of the federation in view of the damage caused to the environment and forest. Dave also maintained that all sort of mining was done only in forest areas.ADVERTISEMENT