With tree-topped ridges, scented meadows, mysterious valleys, snow-capped mountains, lush green forests, attractive wildlife and misty morning views, Ranikhet, a hill resort in Uttaranchal, truly represents the best of Kumaon Hills.

ADVERTISEMENTAmidst rustling pine trees, Ranikhet is situated 60 kilometres away from Nainital. What sets it apart from the other Himalayan hill destinations is that one can view nature and its elements in their full glory here. One can visit Ranikhet during any season as the weather is enjoyable during most part of the year. While in spring, one can see a variety of flowers blooming in full glory, in winter, snowflakes cover the entire region in sheets of pure whiteness. The months of June and July also brings some wild flowers to the upper regions of Ranikhet. 

The skies remain clear, the days are sunny and there is healthy nip in the air during most part of the year. Situated at an altitude of 1,829 metres, Ranikhet, which means the queen’s field, has many interesting stories surrounding it. Legend has it that it won the heart of Rani Padmini, wife of Raja Sudhardev, who chose it as home. 

It was considered by British troops as a Cantonment town. Besides, the quiet walks and charming picnic spots, the residential club here offers temporary membership to tourists and provides them amenities like tennis court, excellent golf links, indoor recreational facilities and outstanding food. The museums and memorials can be termed as ‘jewels’.

 There is even an Army museum where many ancient and modern weapons and other items of war are displayed.

The best known landmark in Ranikhet is the Chaubatia Garden. As the name implies, there are four fruit gardens here with a Government Fruit Research Centre. During winters, the entire garden wears a pink and red look with different varieties of fruits, wild flowers and rhododendron bushes in full bloom. The different branches of the same plant yielding flowers with varying fragrance leaves one amazed. 

Majhkhali is another beautiful spot nearby, which is known for its exquisite splendour. The awe-inspiring view of the majestic Himalayan snow-covered peaks is bound to take one’s breath away. Government Agriculture Farm is also a good place to visit. 

Upat and Kalika are famous for one of the best nine hole golf courses in the country. While enjoying a game of golf, one can also admire the view of private orchards situated nearby. Just a kilometre away from Upat is the temple of Goddess Kali. The other temples in the town are Chiniyanaula and Harirakhan Temples. 

The Khairna Bridge, which is amidst lush green trees, is situated around 30 kilometres away from Ranikhet. Here, the road bifurcates and there are many small eating joints where tourists can enjoy a light breakfast. 

The bridge is a scenic spot with a splendid view of River Kosi and the forest nearby is full of fruit orchards and herbal plants. Many tourists enjoy staying here as well to experience nature in all its exquisiteness. 

So if you are an adventurous person and want to enjoy nature in its full glory, then Ranikhet is the best destination for you. 


(The author can be reached at richa.hegde@yahoo.com)