A runaway bride

Sony Entertainment Television presents Saas Bina Sasural on March 1 at 9 pm. After much drama and revelations, Chhedi finally realises his mistake. Kiya is thrown out of the house. Chhedi, along with Toasty, plans to return all the happiness in Ved’s life. ADVERTISEMENTChhedi chalks out a plan to kidnap Nitika and make her run away from the mandap. Chaturvedi family waits for her to come back home and tie the knot with Ved. 

Will Chhedi and Toasty be successful in bringing Nitika back? Tune in to the show to find out. 

Best of the best 

Wildest India’ airs on March 1 at 8 pm on Discovery Channel. Tune in to an iconic and landmark series that celebrates India’s most spectacular wildlife.

From the Himalayan Mountains, down the mighty River Ganges and across the lost world of the North East, explore India’s amazing wildlife and epic terrains through ‘Wildest India’. 

Bieber fever!

Justin Bieber – the name is enough to send millions of young girls into frenzy and get their hearts beating fast. The Bieber boy who turns 18 on March 1 has become an international teenage sensation in a short span of time and he is now here to set fire to your television sets.

On his birthday, starting 8 pm, Big CBS Spark will telecast a special documentary complete with interviews, music videos and exciting rare footage of the teen idol followed by two episodes of the ‘Late Show with David Letterman’ where Justin talks about his likes, dislikes, favourite songs, movies, growing up years and even presents the Letterman’s signature ‘Top Ten’ list.

There will be trivia running through the day giving loads of information about this young star.  His debut single ‘One Time’ charted in the ‘Top 30’ in over ten countries; his debut release ‘My World’ went Platinum in the US, he became the first artiste to have seven songs from a debut album on the ‘Billboard Hot 100’  – facts like these will be on the channel all day on March 1.

Also watch behind-the-scenes footage from his concerts, rare footage from stories on hit American celebrity shows ‘ET’ and ‘The Insider’. Despite all the fame and success surrounding him, Justin remains rooted in his values and credits it to the people around him. “I have such great people around me and such good family,” he says. “I just want to be a good role model to people, and to be able to make good music. I’m going to make mistakes but it’s about learning from them and becoming better. Anything is possible and dreams do come true. Remember to always stay humble and always be gracious and anything can happen.”

So tune in to the channel on March 1 and join the Bieber fever!

Unbelievable shapes 

Dinosaurs, tea parties, a life-size deer head, a sky scraper and a garden! Wonder what in the world could be common to all of these? They are cakes made by America’s best bakeries.

‘Fabulous Cakes’ visits a different area of the country to witness the creation of 
extraordinary custom cakes. 

Watch the top chefs share their tips as they conceive and deliver cakes that take the art of bakery to new heights. ‘Fabulous Cakes’ airs on TLC on March 1 at 5 pm. 

Horrific promotions 

After the box office success of one of the scariest movie franchises of all times — ‘Paranormal Activity’ — Paramount Pictures and Viacom 18 present a film called ‘The Devil Inside’, which is guaranteed to shake even the bravest of souls.

The makers of ‘The Devil Inside’ have a woman dressed like a zombie walking all over the mall during the late night movie shows. The horrific woman has been gripping attention and frightening people by suddenly popping out of nowhere right outside the movie theatre.

The woman generated enormous buzz from the passers-by, shocking them in the malls of Delhi and Mumbai recently. Some of the visitors even clicked photographs of her. 

Releasing on March 2, ‘The Devil Inside’ directed by William Brent Bell stars Fernanda Andrade, Simon Quarterman, Evan Helmuth and Suzan Crowley.

A documentary-style found footage film, ‘The Devil Inside’ is a tale of a woman who becomes involved in a series of exorcisms during her quest to determine what happened to her mother, a woman who murdered three people as a result of being possessed by a demon.

‘The Devil Inside’ has received tremendous buzz in Hollywood circles as one of the scariest films till date. It is also being touted as a film the Vatican does not want people to see! Looks like one has to be a brave soul to catch this movie, which releases on March 2.

Sailing away

The music launch of Vishesh Films and Viacom 18’s ‘Blood Money’, starring Kunal Khemu, Amrita Puri and Mia, was held in the most innovative manner. Director Vishal S Mahadkar along with actors Kunal Khemu, Amrita Puri, Mia, Manish Chaudhary and Jeet Ganguly along with Viacom 18’s COO Vikram Malhotra launched the music of the film on a yacht at the Gateway of India in Mumbai. Also present on the occasion were film-makers Mahesh Bhatt and Mukesh Bhatt. Keeping in mind the storyline of the film, the music launch was planned in the most lavish way. 

And it didn’t end with the cast launching the music. The guests discovered a brand new talent, Kunal Khemu — the singer! The actor sang three songs from the film and had everyone in awe of him once he finished. 
 
(TV SHOW TIMINGS ARE SUBJECT TO CHANGE)