However, the local people have supported the nine-hour ban between 9 pm and 6 am.
Forest Minister C P Yogeeshwar’s recent announcement to extend the existing night traffic ban on the Bandipur-Mudhumalai National Highway-67 (NH 67) and Bandipur-Sultan Batheri National Highway 212 (NH-212) has irked the people in Gundlupet who are strongly objecting to it, stating that it will affect their lives.

The Forest department has, however, assured the people that there will not be any immediate action to extend the ban.

It is not just the traders from Kerala. Even people from Gundlupet have raised their voice against the extension of ban timings.

Workers affected

Farmers and elected representatives , who participated in the meeting to discuss the draft notification issued by the Union Ministry for Environment and Forests, said that extending the ban would be more of a setback to people travelling to Kerala everyday for business purpose. 

“Many people go to work or for business to neighbouring states. They cannot start early and come back home if the ban timings are extended,” said Chandru, a farmer from Gundlupet.

Another person Srinivas, who attended the meeting, said that harvesting and packing perishable commodities in and around Ooty needed some time and the traders transporting the materials would be affected. Gundlupet MLA H S Mahadev Prasad, pointing out that the ban from 9 pm to 6 pm itself was inconvenient to the people and vehicles, said: “There are frequent accidents on these roads and many people from Gundlupet have died. There have been six deaths in the span of one month. They are all people from Kothanalli, Raghavapura and Galaganur, who were rushing home.”

Most of the residents of Gundlupet who attended the meeting demanded that the ban timings should not be extended, but maintained that they welcome the nine-hour ban.

They pointed out that thousands of people who go to work in coffee and tea estates at Nelambur in Kerala and Gudlur in Tamil Nadu and places around Masinagudi and Ooty everyday cannot return if the ban timings are extended.

However, the greens here rubbished the claims about accidents stating most of these accidents happened in the afternoon and were in no way connected to the night traffic ban. 
“A man from Raghavapura met with an accident at 2 pm. How is it connected with the night traffic ban?” questioned a wildlife enthusiast from Gundlupet on condition of anonymity.

Though some of them are of the opinion that the people, including the traders, would get accustomed if the ban was extended, Kaushik Mukherjee, Principal Secretary to the Department of Forests Ecology and Environment, assured the villagers that there would not be any immediate action on the extension of the ban.

However, wildlife experts in the region have demanded that at least speed breakers and speed guns be deployed on these inter-state highways to control speeding vehicles. The State government decided to extend the ban after a elephant calf was killed by a speeding truck from Kerala near Moolehole.
ADVERTISEMENT