The White House and environmental groups were quick to lash out at Hayward’s latest mishap after he was sighted at the JP Morgan Asset Management Round the Island Race, which sees hundreds of yachts race around the Isle of Wight, off England’s south coast.
“Well, to quote Tony Hayward, he has got his life back, as he would say,” White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel said, referencing the BP boss’s now-notorious slip.
“And I think we can all conclude that Tony Hayward is not going to have a second career in PR (public relations) consulting,” he told ABC’s “This Week”.

“This has just been part of a long line of PR gaffes and mistakes,” he said.
Hayward attended the boat race in his native Britain a day after BP announced he was handing over daily control of his firm’s spill response to managing director Bob Dudley, an American.

BP defends CEO 
The CEO was spotted by photographers on his yacht, “Bob”, his $270,000 Farr 52 racing yacht. BP raced to defend Hayward’s vacation outing with his son in Britain.
“Still, no matter where he is, he is always in touch with what is happening within BP,” company spokesman John Curry said. Spokesman Robert Wine noted this was Hayward’s “first non-working day since this (spill) started.” Earlier this week, US lawmakers skewered Hayward for failing to answer questions about the origins of the massive gusher that has spoiled once-pristine beaches and shorelines, killed wildlife and put a big dent in the Gulf Coast’s multi-billion-dollar fishing industry.
Environmental campaigners in Britain sharply criticised Hayward’s decision to attend the race.

Charlie Kronick said his actions were “insulting” and the equivalent of “rubbing salt into the wounds” of those affected by the worst environmental disaster in US history.
“Personally, I don’t think that the bloke is particularly competent from the results that he has delivered,” said Hugh Walding, a spokesman for Friends of the Earth on the Isle of Wight.

Republican Senator Richard Shelby of Alabama, one of the four Gulf Coast states sullied by the brownish tides of thick oily mix, called Hayward’s yacht outing “the height of arrogance”.

“I can tell you that yacht ought to be here skimming and cleaning up a lot of the oil,” he told Fox News television.
The yacht finished the race fourth in its class, according to the event’s official website.
AFPADVERTISEMENT