The Forest department has come up with a novel idea to increase forest cover, create inviolate areas for wildlife conservation and mitigate man-animal conflict.

ADVERTISEMENTThe department is urging agencies undertaking infrastructure projects to invest in private land around forest areas, instead of revenue pockets. They can buy such land and hand it over to the department as part of compensatory afforestation (CA) - in exchange of forest land acquired for the projects.

The department has started a survey of private and revenue lands in and around forest areas for the purpose of CA. A letter requesting user agencies seeking CA land is making rounds in the department offices for the past one week.

Mitigating conflict

Anur Reddy, additional principal chief conservator of forests, said getting land in and around forest areas is a good idea. This will help mitigate man-animal conflict, especially around Kollegal (Chamarajanagar district), where there is a need to strengthen the elephant corridor. Since there is no survey done so far, directors of reserve forests will be told to identify such areas.

From 1990 to May 2016, the department diverted over 29,000 hectares of forest land for 670 projects. In the last two years, it has received over 200 proposals seeking permission to divert forest land. They are for works like roads, canals, schools, hospitals, electricity transmission lines, mining, quarrying, wind mills, irrigation and mini-hydel projects.

“There are a lot of private lands in and around forest enclosures. In the vicinity of the Kali tiger reserve, we have found 100 acres. These areas can be bought from farmers. This land will also help in tribal relocation. Acquisition of land for creating inviolate areas in protected areas is an important means of consolidating forests and conserving wildlife,” said Srinivasulu Krishnamurthy, director of the reserve.

A forest official explained, “Users prefer to hand over revenue land because it is cheaper. Since we are unable to find people to invest in private land and hand it over to us, even under corporate social responsibility, this is a good way to get land. Though it will be expensive for users, it will help increase green cover.”