The term public space may be referred to as a piece of land reserved for common people for recreational purposes. But in the vast Bengaluru South Assembly constituency, it has got an altogether different meaning.

The shrinking lung space in this constituency indicates that some people mistook public space for the right to encroach upon the common land. Like in many other parts of Bengaluru, creation of bogus khatas, meddling with survey sketches, silence of public representatives on the loot of public properties and scant respect for environment are the major worries in this constituency.

Once known for having the maximum number of lakes in the City, the Bengaluru South constituency has lost many of them to real estate mafia, who formed a layout on a lake bed. Many hillocks were completely destroyed to pave way for layouts, shops, malls and educational institutions owned by the power that be.

Take Turahalli forest, for example. It stands testimony to the brazen loot of public land. The only forest left in the haphazardly growing Bengaluru would have been a thing of the past had the green brigade not taken up the cause.

The threat to those raising their voices against land grabbing, especially forest land, is so much that a wildlife volunteer preferred to speak on condition of anonymity. He said the Turahalli forest is spread over more than 100 acres of land and is home to many wildlife creatures.

 However, there were attempts to destroy the lush green patch by tampering with the government records, where it was not shown as a forest but an agriculture land, so as to allot the hillock to individuals under the Bagair Hukum scheme.

The scheme is meant for landless farm labourers, but most of the beneficiaries were closely associated with one or the other political parties. It was only after some environmentalists raised their voices against it that the allotment was cancelled.

Villages ignored
The residents of Gubbalala village are up in arms against the apathetic attitude of BWSSB. Says H Raju, resident of Gubbalala village: 

“Ours is a five-hundred-year-old village. But never did we face a water crisis like we are witnessing today. Our grouse is that the civic authorities have chosen to provide Cauvery water connection to the apartments, instead of the old villages,” said Raju.

Another rustic place that lost its identity due to the developmental activities is Vasanthapura. A sleepy village 30 years ago, it is now a BBMP ward, full of hustle and bustle. 

The 500-year-old Vasantha Vallabharaya Swamy temple and the temple tank (kalyani) remind one of the glorious past of Vasanthapura. But three years ago, attempts were made to cover the temple tank and build a road and a park for access to a property behind the kalyani.

Village residents say that water crisis and lack of sewerage system are major problems in their ward. Vijay M of the ward says that people are forced to draw water from a well, which is polluted now and there is water only at a great depth. Open defecation, in the absence of a public toilet, has polluted the hillock on which the Vasantha Vallabharaya Swamy temple is located, complains B P Manjunath of the village.

The Konanakunte ward had good roads till recently when the BWSSB decided to lay water pipelines. More than the civic authorities, it is the low civic sense of residents which should be blamed for the garbage dumped everywhere in the ward.

M R Subba Rao, a resident, said that after the completion of the BWSSB work, asphalting did not happen, due to which the road has become a nightmare for motorists and pedestrians.

The Anjanapura ward is a victim of BBMP’s apathy. The crater-sized potholes, lack of pavements, heaps of garbage, mosquito menace and stray dogs are indications of this. Water crisis is severe in this ward as Cauvery water has not reached there. People depend on groundwater, but most of the borewells have gone dry as people in the water business have drilled the earth up to 1,800 feet.

“Each house has a borewell, but most of them have become defunct. We are facing a severe water crisis and the government should act immediately,” said Sathyanarayana, a resident.

In Begur ward, the road connecting Doddakammanahalli road to Begur Koppa road is in a pathetic condition.ADVERTISEMENT
Residents complain that the traffic has increased manifold in the past one year. To make things worse, about 40-50 BBMP garbage compactors use the road daily, thus raising a stink.

At Vishwapriya Layout, residents complained of bad roads and poor drainage system. Stray dog menace and poor waste collection are other issues haunting the residents of this ward.