Art Mantram, which is known for promoting contemporary Indian art, recently held a painting exhibition called ‘Monsoon Showers’ at Hyatt. 

ADVERTISEMENTOther than the showcase, the event’s highlight was the ‘Mantram Women Achiever’s Awards 2013’ being given to theatre personality and actress Arundhati Nag, odissi dancer-choreographer Surupa Sen and renowned artist Renu George, who is the director of ‘Gallery Time And Space’.

The show presented the work of artists like Yusuf Arakkal, Arpana Caur, SG Vasudev, K Suresh, Ganpati Hegde and Rajesh Baderia, ranging from mediums like oil on canvas and acrylic on canvas to pastel on paper and ink on paper. 

Quite a variety of themes were explored — village life, abstract art, portraits, Krishna, nature and wildlife among others.

On his latest collection, artist SG Vasudev says, “The two paintings I’ve showcased are a part of my new series called ‘She’. The characters started emerging from my previous ‘Theatre of Life’ series, where I gave a lot of importance to myths and stories of women.”

Anshuman Majumdar’s ink on paper sketches of ‘The Chariot Pullers’ and ‘Under The Elephant’ stood out in the gallery, as did Gyanesh Mishra’s ‘Save The Tiger’ series. 
Speaking about his pieces, Gyanesh explains, “The tiger was once found in lakhs and now, there are only a few thousands, which is why I started this 50-painting series. 
Shakti, for example, shows goddess Durga with her vahan, the tiger. The animal once belonged to the gods and goddesses and now, we’re killing it for our own selfish purpose. ‘At The Museum’ shows the skeleton of the tiger and reflects how one is practically forced to go to a museum to see the tiger.” 

On the exhibition itself, he says, “I’m very happy because my work is being showcased alongside many of my seniors. It’s a great place to show people my work.”

Ramesh Singh Dhami, who often visits art shows in the City, says, “Some of the modern artists being showcased are creating a lovely fusion between traditional and contemporary, which is very interesting. In both Gyanesh and Anshuman’s work, that can be seen. But many of these works are quite romanticised and painted with realism. The abstract art is missing.” Arundhati Nag, who was awarded for her contribution to theatre, was visibly excited to be there. “It’s always nice when someone recognises your work,” she says.