With Delhi University beginning its 2014-17 session in full swing and welcoming students through its orientation programs, it’s time to pack your bags, get out of the lazy-summer mood and blend into the Delhi University’s culture.

ADVERTISEMENT From drama to debates, the University will offer you everything that you are interested in apart from your main course stream.

The plethora of societies and clubs in the University not only savour your interests in co-curricular activities and familiarises you with the world of freedom and opportunity, but also enhance and boost up your personality. Do not mistake in not choosing any one of them. 

The array of societies offe­red by various colleges at the University range from drama, choreography, western dance, folk dance, western music, classical music to debating, ecological clubs, equal opportunity cell, photography clubs et al. 

Students admitting to Kirori Mal College, Hansraj College, Hindu College, and St. Stephens College in the North Campus or the Kamala Nehru College at the South Campus should feel lucky as you have entered the best rated zone of societies in DU. 

Among DU’s most adorable are The Players, theatre society and The Film Society of Kirori Mal College; The Dramatics Society and Swaranjali, the music society of Hansraj College; Ibtida, the dramatics society and Vivre, the photography society of Hindu College; Bazam-E-Adad, urdu literature society and Wildlife society of St. Stephens College; and Glitz, the fashion society and Crossfire, the debating society of Kamala Nehru College.

SPIC MACAY is Delhi University’s only society which is common to all colleges for the promotion of Indian classical music and culture amongst the youth. 

While the clubs come as an option open to students to choose or not to choose but what remains compulsory in all DU colleges is to participate in any one out of National Social Service (NSS), National Cadet Corps (NCC) and National Sports Organisation (NSO). Whether you like it or not you have to join it. 

When you do all this, you will certainly end up getting late after practice sessions that may also compromise your safety. Though North campus is generally considered to be safe, it is the south campus that may make to prone, so never forget to keep a can of pepper spray in your bag. 

And for the students who are in the assumptions that they are over with studies in 12th board exams and plan to take DU as a vacation destination, think twice as the University has very stringent and rigid attendance rules, which may also end up in cancellation of your admission in 
the college at the end of the semester. 

As you find yourself comfortable with the Delhi University’s culture, do take up five challenges that DU offers the best. Take part in organising events in your college as a union member, take up summer internships for your curriculum vitae and boost your practical skills, learn add-on foreign language courses, explore the city with your camera and take up social work.