The South Asian Terrorism portal shows that 2,997 civilians, 1,913 security personnel and 2,576 Maoists have been killed in CPM-Maoist infested tribal districts between 2005 and 2017. According to the Union Home Ministry, over 15,000 people, including more than 3,000 security personnel, have been killed in the naxal violence in the last 35 years. 

Long violence has caused irreparable damage to the tribal economy. The tribals make exotic handicrafts, do agriculture, collect hundreds of minor forest products, weave exotic fabrics and do fishing activities. They make utility items from biode­gradable materials available in the forest. Over the years, those utility pieces have become art objects with high value addition. 

Dhokra craft, iron craft, tribal jewellery, wood craft, ragged dolls and bead work etc have demand in domestic and global craft bazaars. The tribal have the skill to make hundreds of utility items from grass, tree leaves, cane and organic fibres. A deeper understanding of the tribal culture and its economy will not only reduce the red menace but make forestry a vibrant economic sector.

Tribal living in forest fringed villages collect honey, medicinal plants, bamboo, timber, ivory, fruits, other minor forest products and grow organic food grains. As per the Agriculture Processed Food Products Export Development Authority (Apeda), the country has exported 38,177.08 MT of natural honey worth Rs 705.87 crore in 2015-16. The domestic demand for pure honey is very high due to its various medicinal, nutritional and religious value. Malkangiri tribal of Odisha collect organic tamarind, grow black gram and green gram but sell it to traders and middlemen at a far lower price. 

Similarly, the tribal of Mayurbhanj district of the state make ropes from Sabai grass, a natural fibre which grows abundantly in the district. The rope is used for various purposes including furniture making. The Rs 400 crore rope trade is controlled by the outside traders. Here a tribal rope maker hardly earns Rs 150 per day. 

The tribal also make Khalipata (saal leaf plate), grow special kind of organic Tandula (tur dal), collect bamboo and other minor forest products from the forest. Traders and middlemen buy their products at throw away price and sell it at high price. The Dhokra craft of Mayurbhanj is very popular in international craft bazaars for its artistry. As the tribal artisans do not get the profit they deserve they lose interest and skill.

Chhattisgarh tribals sing, dance and make exotic handicrafts. The Gaur and Ahirai folk dancers and singers of Chhattisgarh give their performance in foreign countries. Teejan Bai, the noted Pandbani singer and Padma Shri award winner of Chhattisgarh has performed in many countries. Tribal artisans of Bastaar make export quality wood craft, iron craft and dhokra craft which are very popular in handicraft markets. The Jhabua tribal make dolls from rags which are of export quality. Forest always gives them inspiration and raw material.

A unique study — Green Accounting for Indian states and Union Territories Project — for the first time estimated the value of our forest at Rs 88,60,259 crore as on 2003. The study reveals the economic values of nutrient loss: nitrogen, phosphor­ous, potassium and organic matter in the country was Rs 5,024 crore. The decrease in st­ate of timber alone in two years between 2001 and 2003 makes for a wealth depletion of Rs 38,000 crore. There has been no survey to assess the huge loss between 2003 and 2016.

Sustainable development
Sustainable forest management could become a means of creating millions of green jobs, thus helping to reduce poverty and improve the environment, said Jan Heino, Assistant Director General of Food and Agriculture Organiation’s Forestry Department. India’s 89 national parks, 504 wildlife sanctuaries, 14 biospheres and 25 wetlands should be micro managed for sustainable development.  
Elinor Ostrom, US political scientist who was awarded the 2009 Nobel Memorial Prize in economic governance, said: “monitoring of local users holds the key to improve forest conditions. When local users have long-term rights to harvest from the forest, they are more likely to monitor and sanction those who break the rules and better forest conditions.” 

The value of international trade in forest products has increased by almost 50% in the last decade. Here, the government has to make the tribal capable of managing their forest.

Foreign tourists happily spend Rs 1 lakh to Rs 2 lakh each to sight wild animals in natural environment. One horned rhino, Asiatic lion, migratory birds, crocodiles, royal Bengal tiger, black buck, lion tailed macaque, snow leopard, Nilgiri tahr, repti­les and a wide range of flora and fauna always attract tourists.

Besides wildlife tourism, the tribal sports talent can also be tapped. The world’s best hockey full back Dileep Tirkey, Olymp­ian Michel Kindo, dozens of hockey stars, Dutee Chand, the 100 m national champion sprin­ter who missed the Rio Olympic qualifying score by 0.01 seconds, Mary Kom, the six-time world amateur boxing champion and the legendary footballer Bai­chung Bhutia are tribals.

The government should evolve a tribal-specific development policy and improve governance which will create sustainable employment opportunities in forestry sector.ADVERTISEMENT