Wildlife experts have expressed concern over efforts to repopulate the tiger in the Sariska reserve.

Six tigers were translocated to the Sariska tiger reserve over the last three and a half years from the Ranthambore National Park.Now, five tigers—two males and three females—are left, after the first one relocated to the reserve died of poisoning.

The entire project of relocating tigers to Sariska has been put on hold. The already relocated tigers have failed to produce any offspring. The Forest Department has conducted scat test on the tigers at aHyderabad laboratory for DNAanalysis to find any genetic deformity hampering reproduction among the relocated tigers. It, however, denied anything wrong with the tigers. Then, why did the tigerfail to reproduce? This is an unsolved mystery.

According to insiders, the Hyderabad laboratorywas not happy with the quantity and quality of the scat samples sent
for examination to arrive at a conclusive opinion.

Meanwhile, the state Forest Department has adopted a wait andwatch policy.A department official on condition of anonymity said: “Sariska was an experiment. It was for the first time in the world that such an experimentwas conducted.

An experiment can go eitherway. If the tigers failed to breed it is not our fault.”

Sariska Tiger foundation, an NGO which has been advocating reintroduction of tigers in Sariska is, however, not happy with the present situation in Sariska. Sunnyan Sharma of the foundation said: “The Forest Department has to find the reasons why the tigers are not reproducing. Forty-four months have elapsed since the first tigresswas relocated and other two were there for a pretty long time. It is a matter of serious concern. If they do not breed then the very object of repopulating them will be
defeated”.

Sharma also questioned the logic of continuing with the radio collar on the shifted tigers.

“These tigers were fitted with radio collar belts to facilitate round-the-clock monitoring during the initial days of their
translocation till the newly shifted animals take time in adapting to the new conditions,”he said.

Rashpal Singh, a wildlife enthusiast and amemberof the Rajasthan state wildlife board, concurred with Sharma.He said though there is no proof of radio collar interfering with the breeding there is no point in continuing with it once the animal acclimatised to the conditions. It seems the Forest Department is playing it safe.ADVERTISEMENT