Private commercial resorts in the vicinity of wildlife sanctuaries will soon have to shut up shop. A decision to this effect was taken at a meeting of the Forest department officials on Monday.

ADVERTISEMENTIt was also decided to shut down all guesthouses of the department inside the forest areas having tiger and elephant populations and shift them outside the forest zone.

Speaking to reporters after the meeting, Forest Minister C P Yogeeshwara said the Karnataka government had decided to serve notices on illegal private resorts located near wildlife sanctuaries, asking them to close down, to curb the harmful effect on forests and wildlife. 

He said a recent survey had revealed that there were 30 commercial resorts in the vicinity of wildlife sanctuaries, especially in the tiger reserves of the State. 
These resorts had come up to cater to tourists visiting sanctuaries and were hindering the wildlife ecosystem. Some of these resorts had been constructed on encroached forest land, he said.

The minister said private resorts, including the government-run Jungle Lodges and Resorts Limited, should not entirely depend on tourists visiting forest areas for income and should diversify their jurisdiction.

Guesthouses

In another decision, the government has decided to shift all the guesthouses of the department located inside forest area. The department had constructed guesthouses for administrative work. But there was huge demand for these by officials and their families for overnight accommodation and holiday trips, resulting in their misuse. The department would shift the guesthouses in a phased manner to areas outside the forest zone, he said.

Tiger reserves

The minister welcomed the recent Supreme Court decision to lift its interim ban on tourism in core areas of tiger reserves. The government would take all steps to ensure protection of tiger reserves, he said. 

Following the court decision, the government will soon allow revival of safaris in core areas of tiger reserves, with some conditions. 

A committee headed by the principal secretary of the Forest department will frame guidelines to regulate the movement of tourists and vehicles inside the reserves, he said.