For 28-year-old Tarun Swaroop, last Friday evening was a nightmare. He had to be rushed to a hospital after a bunch of monkeys attacked him while he was waiting for his friend on his motorcycle at Patel Chowk.

ADVERTISEMENTTwo monkeys charged at him and bit his leg. “I thought they were after my cell phone as I was talking on it. So I threw it away in order to distract them, but it didn’t work. They chewed it and continued the assault,” the private firm employee says.

Three more monkeys joined the attack, and bit him on his arms and legs. “To save myself, I ran to a crowded place. After seeing other people, the monkeys didn’t chase me.”

Tarun is now getting treated at Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital. But he had to buy serum derived from human plasma from a private pharmacist as the drug is not available in every hospital.

The quantity of the serum needed is proportionate to the patient's body weight. At 65 kilos, he needed five shots.

“I had to buy it from a private chemist as the drug was not available at the hospital. It cost me around Rs 25,000 as it is imported from Germany.” 

According to a doctor treating him, the serum derived from human plasma is not required frequently. “Only one in 100 cases requires serum derived from human plasma. In rest of the cases, serum derived from animal plasma works and it is available free of cost at hospitals,” the doctor says. “The government doesn’t provide human serum.”

Amit Singh met the same fate, but the villain in his story was a stray dog. The incident took place two week ago. “I came to my society (Pocket F) and parked my car at its usual place. As soon as I came out of the car, a dog came from nowhere and bit me near my ankle,” says Amit, a resident of Mayur Vihar Phase II. “I felt pain and when I lifted my trousers, it was bleeding,” the 30-year-old adds.

When he went to a nearby clinic, they didn’t have the vaccine. “So I went to Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital. But they didn’t have the human serum either so I had to buy it from a private pharmacist.” 

Delhi is not new to the monkey or dog menace but civic authorities have done little to deal with the problem. The High Court has pulled up municipal corporations many times for having failed to control the strays menace.

The monkey menace in the capital came to the fore in 2007 when Delhi’s Deputy Mayor S S Bajwa died due to head injuries following a fall from the terrace of his house after monkeys attacked him.

A senior official with New Delhi Municipal Council says there were 13 complaints of monkey menace in the area from March to May 19, 2014. The areas from where the complaints were reported include Patel Chowk, Mandir Marg, Connaught Place and Prithviraj Market.

“There are 40 monkey catchers with the NDMC. We have employed these people to catch monkeys and send them to Asola Bhatti Wildlife Sanctuary. But catching one or two monkeys daily is not the solution. So we are meeting Forest Department officials to discuss ways to control their population,” says the senior New Delhi Municipal Council official.

According to East Delhi Municipal Corporation,  27 monkeys were caught in 2013 from the areas falling under the civic agency’s jurisdiction. About 120 monkeys were caught in 2012. East Corporation has only two monkey catchers, its spokesman Yogendra Singh Mann says.

In all, 491 monkeys were caught in 2013 in North Delhi Municipal Corporation area. In the previous year   476 were caught. The North agency has three monkey catchers. There were 8,987 dog-bite cases and 163 monkey-bite cases in North Corporation areas in 2013. Over 6,000 stray dogs were sterilised between January 2013 and April 2014.      

The East Delhi Municipal Corporation sterilised 6,464 dogs between January 2013 and April 2014; a total of 5,927 dogs were sterilised in 2012.

The population of dogs has been increasing every year. “Dogs are caught with the help of NGOs. There are a total of nine NGOs which are involved in catching dogs in the areas under the three municipal corporations,” adds Mann. “They are caught, sterilised and left at the same place from where they have been picked up.”

Critics say the exercise of catching dogs doesn’t serve any purpose. “The dogs are brought back in the same area. They start creating nuisance again. They start preying on the passers-by,” says Richa Mani, a resident of Mayur Vihar Phase I. 

And then there is the problem about availability of serum. “The drug is in not available with every hospital in the city. Cases of dog bite are rampant in our locality,” says Krishan Lal, a Mukherjee Nagar resident.

A doctor at Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital says the hospital sees between 20 and 25 cases of dog bite every month, and only two to three cases of monkey bite. But the victims have a a different story to tell. “When I had gone to RML Hospital, there were at least 100 people lined up to get the vaccine,” says Amit Singh.

Threat of monkey attack is not limited to schools, residential or commercial areas. Some commuters have complained about the monkeys at Metro stations. “Monkey menace is quite rampant near Kashmere Gate station. At times, monkeys are seen running on the platform and it causes panic among the commuters,” says Poornima Kaul, who lives in Shahdara and takes the Red Line daily for her college in north campus.

“Metro officials have not taken any concrete measure yet to deal with the problem. At the most, guards or maintenance staff shoo them away but that’s not a permanent solution. They should cover the premises by fencing it. The authorities need to pay attention to the fact that safety of passengers, including women and children, is at stake,” she adds.

Animal rights activists say doing away with dogs or monkeys does no good.“The problem lies with people’s perception about stray animals. When a kid sees a dog, he screams, his mom says shoo him away. It instills fear in the mind of the kids which only grows with his age,” says Kriti Shukla, who is an animal lover and feeds dogs at night around Mayur ViharPhase I.

“A child should rather be told not to be afraid of them; not to run away, stay there as the dog wouldn’t do anything. The kid can then learn to live with them,” she adds.Some argue that getting rid of all the strays in residential localities will be an extreme step. They cite security reasons to have dogs around.

“A couple of months ago in Pocket 4 Mayur Vihar Phase I, two robbers broke into a flat. A dog started barking like anything and the guard came to see what was wrong. Seeing a number of guards, the robbers ran away without looting anything,” says Balachandran, who lives in the same society.

Some women also feel safe if friendly strays follow them on their way home at night. “Sometimes streets get deserted at night and if I see a dog, I try to make it walk with me till I reach home,” says Saket resident Veena Mehta.