Having been in the fashion industry as a designer for 19 years, Jayanthi  Ballal put up her first solo show in 2010 in her hometown of Mysuru. She soon came up with the idea of a  ‘model hunt’ in 2013, which she started as a platform for young models from different places like Coorg and Chikkamagaluru. ADVERTISEMENTHowever, being a designer, she wanted to do something different for all the aspiring designers of her hometown and came up with the concept of ‘Mysore Fashion Extravaganza’ in the same year and later called it Mysore Fashion Week in 2014. “People of Mysuru were not very fashion-oriented and had a laid back attitude when it came to fashion norms and trends. But today, their mindset towards fashion has changed a lot, which is a good thing,” says Jayanthi. 

She is mostly into bridal wear and her forte lies in reworking old saris with a mix and match combination of colours, patterns and techniques. If one glances through her work, they will notice that her style of work is highly inspired by the arts of Mysuru. “I incorporate heritage jewellery motifs in my outfits which look rich and make each garment stand apart from the  other. There is a lot of influence of the wildlife and the festivals as well,” she adds. 

Saying that she wanted to be a designer right from her childhood days, Jayanthi recalls how she used to draw design sketches and sit with a tailor to create something out of her old school uniforms and other old clothes, adding that she has designed skirts, dresses and even crop tops by herself. This got her a lot of appreciation from friends and family. 

“Fashion keeps changing; it is the style that matters the most. It enlightens one and is something by which people recognise  an individual most of the time,” says Jayanthi when asked what fashion is according to her. 

Working with jewellery motifs has become an integral part of her collections and it will be seen in the latest line that she will be presenting at the upcoming 'Mysore Fashion Week' as well. 

She adds a contemporary touch to every garment, making it favourable for youngsters. Colours like red, blue and pink have always been her dominant choice. “I work mostly with ‘Kanjeevaram’ and others silks. Apart from these, brochette and nets are my other favourite fabrics,” she says. 

Having been in this industry for long, her advice to the younger designers is to make up their mind on what they really want to do and only then take a step forward. 

“Having a firm mind will get them ample opportunities. Hard work is something that goes hand in hand with this and is an absolute must,” says Jayanthi.