Kumble, who led RCB in the second and third editions of IPL, cited his other commitments as the reason behind withdrawal. 

“I wish to withdraw from the players’ auction for the IPL IV scheduled for January 8 and 9 in Bangalore. I have enjoyed my stint in the IPL so far and thank all concerned for the support extended. But it’s time for me to move on,” Kumble said.

Kumble was elected as the president of the Karnataka State Cricket Association in November last year, and he has also been actively involved in wildlife projects as the vice-chairman of the State Wildlife Board besides being a member of the WADA. 

India’s leading wicket-taker in Tests (619) and one-dayers (337), Kumble is also the chairman of the National Cricket Academy.

On his new role as RCB’s chief mentor, Kumble said, “It is fabulous to see the way Royal Challengers team is shaping up for season four of IPL. The team has performed very well, much to the delight of their fans, and has showcased their undying faith in the Royal Challengers’ talent pool. 

“I’m excited to take on the mentoring role for Royal Challengers. 

“At the same time, the task involves huge responsibility to better the benchmarks that Royal Challengers have already created in the last two seasons. I’m confident that I will deliver to the team’s and fans expectations. I am ready to take on the challenge.”

In his capacity as the chief mentor Kumble will work along with and support the CEO of RCB, chief coach, the physio and trainer and the team analyst. He will also work in close association with team owner Vijay Mallya.

“Anil’s leadership, both on-field and off-field augured well for the Royal Challengers in the last two seasons of the IPL as well as in the Champions League. I sincerely believe Anil’s presence in the RCB Leadership Team will provide a fresh dimension and perspective to our strategy in the long term. 

“His astute leadership at the IPL that carried RCB to a top-three finish in two successive years coupled with administrative skills offer a unique combination. I am indeed, delighted to welcome him once again on the RCB leadership panel,” Mallya said.ADVERTISEMENT