Every picture must have a lot of drama in it to hold the viewer’s  attention and even transport the person into an altogether different world. This is what award-winning photographer H Satish believes and has practised throughout his career as a wildlife and landscape photographer.

ADVERTISEMENTSatish takes his camera and ventures out into the wild which he describes as his calling. It takes a long time to get that perfect shot and the wait is worth its while given what emerges at the end, feels Satish. 

Satish shares with Nina C George his love for photography. 
 
What does photography mean to you?
Photography is an art but sadly here in India it doesn’t command as much value and importance as it does in the West. While money counts here in India, it is the experience and the effort that is respected in the West. The mindsets have to change here.

What category would you slot your photography into?
I specialise in wildlife and landscape, which I think are two of the most difficult mediums. I travel a lot to the northern part of the country because that’s where I get the best pictures.
 
How do you keep pace with competition?
I would say the internet is the biggest competition. Some people take a picture, post it on social media and are happy when they get many likes for it.  But I believe in waiting to capture the right shot. I would rather have people seek me out for my work than go out into the virtual world with it. In that sense I am not a part of the competition.  

Tell us about your award? 
I have been awarded the ‘Master-ICS’ which has been instituted by the The Image Colleague Society of California. It has been given to me for 25 digital images on the subject of ‘Indian Birds’ under the category of ‘Art Photography’. Capturing birds and animals is indeed a very difficult task. One would have to spend almost the whole day just waiting for one picture. I knew what birds I wanted to shoot and where I could find them. I did a little bit of research on birds which helped me understand their behaviour. 

Mixing photography and research... 
I always blend photography with research because the two are inseparable. 
You need to understand the subject and its surroundings before you venture out with the camera. Photography involves 80% of animal behaviour, 10% of photography and 10% of luck.