Dear Tej,
With globalisation and the healthy growth of the Indian economy, any field has ‘good scope’, if the individual chooses a course based on her capabilities, skills and aptitude. Medicine and Engineering (and Law, Hotel Management, Agricultural Sciences, paramedical degrees) are in demand because they help the student acquire analytical, numerical and verbal skills, after which she can specialise in a field of her choice.  Help your cousin find her strengths and match them to her interests. 
 
Dear Sir,
I am in Class 12. I want to pursue Environmental Studies after school. What options do I have? I enjoy Biology. Are there any branches related to Environmental Studies and Research?
Amruta

Dear Amruta,
There are many branches of Environmental Studies that will enable you to get into research. Some examples are pollution control, green architecture, ecology balance, conservation of forests/ water resources, wildlife/ marine life preservation, tribal welfare, etc. Identify a specific area of interest and work towards it. Take up a degree in Life Sciences (BSc or BSc Honours; the latter is only offered by a few universities), and then earn a specialised qualification at the master’s level, either in India or abroad.

Dear Sir,
I have completed an ITI course in Electronics & Mechanical Engineering. But I want a degree in a ‘single sitting’ under UGC. So where should I apply?
Anjan Kumar

Dear Anjan,
Very often we come across advertisements of private coaching institutes offering degrees through a ‘single sitting’.  Under UGC rules, this is not permitted.  Anyone who has completed 18 years is eligible to enroll directly for a degree programme under the Open University scheme, but he/ she has to appear all semester exams until the course is completed. While many universities offer courses in Arts, Commerce, Management and Science, very few offer programmes in Engineering. Karnataka State Open University, (www.sharadavikas.com), Thapar University (Patiala), IGNOU, and SRM College, Chennai are some of the colleges which you can contact.ADVERTISEMENT