It is the monotony of a desk job that urged Ishaan Raghunandan to chase his passion for photography. Ishaan completed his degree in engineering but his interest always seemed to revolve around the camera and travelling. He has also used his technical skills to design a software that helps with plant identification, and to build his own camera trap using a ‘Raspberry Pi’. Ishaan always finds the slightest of excuse to travel and he says he couldn’t have been able to chase his passion for photography without the support and encouragement of his parents. Ishaan speaks to Nina C George about what got him hooked to photography and why he believes that every picture has more than a story to tell.

Why did you choose to pursue photography after completing a degree in engineering? 
ADVERTISEMENTPhotography was never a choice. It came naturally to me. After constantly borrowing my friends’ cameras while doing my degree in engineering, I was gifted a point-and-shoot camera for my birthday by a friend. The next birthday, I convinced my parents to get me a base model DSLR. By this time, the wheels were already in motion. The tipping point came when my cousin Mukul Soman told me that he saw a promising photographer in me. 

How did you extend your love for photography to cover your interest in wildlife conservation and rural documentary?
When I was in my teens, my father, who was working in the department of rural development, would take me out with him during his visits to some of the rural areas. These visits left a huge impact on me. I found rural lifestyle more to my liking. I found that rural folks have more humanity than those living in the city. I found their way of life to be more ‘real’ and in sync with the environment around them. And animals have always been close to my heart.

How do you intend to use photography to promote social causes? 
I’ve always used photography to promote social causes. It is a medium of storytelling. What I work towards is being a better storyteller and telling the right story. 

What kind of images capture your attention and why?  
Currently, it is images that tell a story. I think a variety of images when knit together tell the story in a beautiful fashion. I think every picture tells a story whether you are looking or not.

How did photography become an important part of your life?
Photography has  slowly become a part of me because it is what I love doing. It has taken me places and given me experiences I could have never dreamt of.