Indian Premier League (IPL) is not just hectic cricket sprinkled with fun. Most cricketers find in the IPL the perfect opportunity to soak in the carnivalesque spirit that prevails during the season.

Kyle Abbott, a South African cricketer and a popular player of the Kings XI Punjab team, says he can’t get enough of India during IPL. He had great curiosity and excitement for India when he first came and it still persists. 

With the ICC World Twenty20 preceding the IPL this year, Kyle observes that he is spending his longest time travelling in India. He also had his girlfriend Kristy and his parents come visit him during the tournament. 

He says he and his family always cherish the time they spend travelling to different parts of the country, doing everything from experimenting with food, sightseeing or simply strolling down the streets of Mumbai and Bengaluru. 

“When my parents and I were walking through the streets of Mumbai, we spotted a street vendor selling a monkey and a cobra. He offered both of them to us for a cheap price. We were dumbstruck,” says Kyle, adding that this was one of his most dreadful street-shopping experiences. 

He always makes time to travel between matches. “When we were in Nagpur we went to the Pench National Park there and went on the wildlife safari. We also visited a couple of places in Delhi as well,” he adds. 

Kyle also hopes to travel to Dharamsala before he heads back home. “I really love the mountains. There’s something very majestic and mysterious about them. If I can’t make it this time I hope to come back on a non-cricketing trip and go there,” he says. 

The young cricketer has had some great experiences trying out all kinds of Indian cuisines at some of the choicest restaurants. Since he also cooks he has definite ideas and tastes when it comes to the kind of cuisines he wants to eat. “I cook whenever I get time. I always make it a point to try all the Indian curries. I love the South Indian coffee and I relish masala tea as well,” he adds. 

But he hasn’t had the courage to try the street food just yet. “I am a bit wary of street food.” He describes IPL as a ‘colourful tournament’ and says that the format doesn’t leave cricketers with any time to stand and stare. “There’s also no time for disappointments. We have to move on.” 

Kyle believes in a simple philosophy — never get stuck in the past. “I believe the bad times will pass and I always try to learn from the bad times rather than get caught in it,” he says.

The team will be travelling to Bengaluru soon for a match and Kyle says that he wouldn’t leave without a visit to ‘The Glass House’. “This is one of the nicest restaurants that I’ve been to and the ‘Hard Rock Cafe’ is another favourite haunt,” he elaborates. ADVERTISEMENT