There is 179.22 acres of grazing land on survey number 124 of Yadapura. The institution had sought 51 acres of land for educational purpose on a lease for 30 years.

According to records there are 328 cattle in Yadapura, Uthuvalli and Shivapura villages. A minimum of 98 acres of land is necessary for grazing purpose. Moreover, the region comes under Chamarajanagar wildlife division. The deputy conservator of forests had written a letter to chief conservator of forest in 2010 to issue a notification under Karnataka Forest Act under Section 4, 1963, to grow forest under JSA funds. He has also clarified that an affidavit has been submitted to the Supreme Court to consider the land as deemed forest.

Meanwhile, an application (takraru arji) had been filed by villagers of Uttuvalli, Yadapura, Moodalapura, Mallaiahanapura, Galipura, Tavaregattemole, Shivapura, Kaduvinakatte Hundi and Veeranapura not to give the land to private parties.

The villagers claimed that gomaala was necessary for cattle of Shivapura and also warned the district administration of a protest if the land was given to private parties.

However, the district administration has submitted a report to the secretary of revenue department that according to Supreme Court order (civil appeal no 1132:20 SLP no 3109:2011), gomaala land should not to be used for other purposes. The report clarified that the gomaala at Yadapura cannot be given on a contract to anybody.

Illegal encroachment

Gomaala lands have been encroached upon illegally in the district. Also, there are reports that the encroached lands are being used for illegal activities. Gomaala lands at Jyothigowdanapura in Chamarajanagar taluk has been used for illegal mining purposes — incurring a loss of crores of rupees to the government.

Senior citizen Shanthappa said gomaala lands should not be utilised for other purposes and the Supreme Court had also issued a directive in this regard. The officials should take steps against the land mafia, which is trying to swallow public property.

 Elected representatives and officials who should protect government land should not support such activities. They should try to create more facilities for cattle and the district administration should at least now take steps to protect gomaala land, he said.

ADVERTISEMENT