Murder and intrigue

Catch ‘The Thirteenth Floor’ on April 13 at 10 pm on AXN. In the late 1990s in Los Angeles, Hannon Fuller (Armin Mueller-Stahl) owns a multi-billion-dollar computer enterprise, and is the inventor of a newly-completed virtual reality simulation of 1937 Los Angeles. When Fuller is murdered just as he begins premature testing of the VR system, his friend and protégé, Douglas Hall (Craig Bierko), becomes the primary suspect, and begins to doubt his own innocence. Between questionings by LAPD Detective Larry McBain (Dennis Haysbert), Hall meets Jane Fuller (Gretchen Mol), who is the estranged daughter of the dead Hannon Fuller. Hall romances Jane, who is busy with the shutdown of the new VR system. 

     When a local bartender who witnessed the murder-night meeting between Hall and Fuller, is found murdered, Hall is imprisoned.  ADVERTISEMENTThe jaws of death

Austin Powers Most Dangerous’ airs on Animal Planet on April 13 at 11 pm. Viewers can join intrepid wildlife photographer and adventurer Austin Stevens, as he takes on some of the most dangerous animals on the planet. Austin is world renowned for his expertise and daring with snakes — however, this will be put to test when he comes face-to-face with deadly cobras, mambas and even Komodo Dragons.

Treat the taste buds

Nigella Kitchen’ features a combination of easy, fast and fabulous recipes to beat the clock at the end of a busy day, and more leisurely recipes to unwind with over relaxing weekends. 
As well as creating dazzling dishes for indulgent days, Nigella offers inspiring and inventive ways to make leftovers taste just as good the second time around.  Catch ‘Nigella Kitchen’ on April 13 at 10.30 pm, on TLC.

A brave plan

In tonight's episode of Balika Vadhu, Anandi tells everyone that Asha and Abhishek love each other and want to get married. But Madan Singh doesn’t agree to this. 

Anandi then requests Sugna to sneak Asha out of the house as they plan to get her married to Abhishek the next morning. Sugna sneaks Asha out of the house but Madan Singh gets to know that she has escaped. What will happen next? Tune in to Balika Vadhu on April 13 at 8 pm on Colors.

Deadly duo together

Here’s some good news for all Big B and Sanju Baba fans — the deadly duo is all set to scorch the screen with their much-awaited action drama ‘Department’, directed by Ram Gopal Varma.  

     The duo perform as part of the baraat for a special wedding song in the film, titled Kammo. They will be seen dancing street-style, like a typical desi shaadi. The look of the masala shaadi song has been put together by Shabina Khan, and it has been composed by none other than Bappa Lahiri. While Bappa has the set the music, the song has been sung by Mika and Sudesh Bhosle. Not only are Sanjay Dutt and Big B sharing extensive screen space, but they’re doing so in one of their most deadly and raw avatars to date. One of the most anticipated films of the year,  ‘Department’ is predominantly a story of a terrifying power struggle within the bowels of the mother of all powers — the police force. The movie also stars Rana Daggubati and is slated to release on May 18. 

Vintage wonders galore

Chasing Classic Cars’ is a full-throttle, high-definition series that follows Wayne Carini, Ferrari expert and master restorer, as he takes viewers on his personal mission to uncover great cars and secret collections. In each episode, Wayne Carini purchases the treasured finds from their current owners and returns them to his shop in Connecticut, where each car is restored to its original specs and then auctioned. Follow Wayne Carini as he reveals some great vehicles on ‘Chasing Classic Cars’, on April 13 at 9.30 pm on Turbo.