The Central Empowered Committee (CEC), a functional wing of the Supreme Court, has submitted its report on the proposed 168 km rail line between Hubballi and the coastal town of Ankola in Uttara Kannada district. It categorically rejected the proposal by concluding “the project would cause huge damage to the forests, wildlife and biodiversity of Western Ghats and which would far outweigh the actual tangible benefits of the project”.

ADVERTISEMENTObviously, it is a big victory for activists who are fighting to save Western Ghats. Nevertheless, the politicians are giving statements that it is just an advice given by CEC to the Supreme Court and that there is every possibility that the decision will be reviewed and a green signal will be given in due course.

The foundation for the present rail line was laid by the then prime minister A B Vajpayee in 1999. The Indian Railways built embankment to lay the rail line in the non-forest areas. 
In 2004, the Ministry of Environment and Forests denied permission to divert 965 hectares of forestland. It said “the construction of new rail track for mainly transporting iron ore has not much justification. On the other hand, this will simply be tragedy on the prime forests of Western Ghats and the biological hotspot of the country”.

Despite this rejection, the railways went ahead with the construction of the rail line in non-forest areas, in violation of Forest Conservation Act. In 2006, the Parisara Sanmrakshana Kendra and Wilderness Club filed a petition in Sup-reme Court against the diversion of forestland for this project. Responding to the petition, the construction was halted by the apex court.

Irrespective of party affiliations, political leaders launched a sustained campaign stating that the rail line is the only way to bring prosperity to the backward district of Uttara Kannada. It will provide the necessary link to the hinterland in North Karnataka and would allow the smooth transport of goods and raw material form the ore rich hinterland to the port in west coast.

The government of Karnataka redrafted the proposal with railways and submitted a revised project to Ministry of Environment and Forests by reducing the forestland form 965 hectares to 727 hectares. In order to substantiate this revised proposal, they took the assistance of prestigious Centre for Ecological Sciences (CES) of the Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru. The CES submitted the report, “Biological Diversity, Ecology and Environmental Impact Assessment” with mitigation measures for Hubballi-Ankola rail line”.
This embedded report jettisoned the scientific ethics and recommended the laying of rail line with implementation of mitigation measures to reduce the ecological impact. Some of the facts in this report was not only contradictory, but their logic boomeranged as the CEC used their calculation of `net present value’ to reject the proposal.

The CEC reports, “The total economic value of the forest land involved in the present project, as assessed by IISc, comes to Rs 10.21 crore per hectare and for 727 hectares of forest land comes to Rs 7,426.69 crore. These figures most effectively demonstrate the extra-ordinarily high ecological and economic value of the forestlands involved in the project”.

Ore export ban

The justification of the project on the ground that it will meet the potential traffic of iron ore form Ballary-Hosapete region has been analysed by CEC with changed scenario. Since 2011, the Supreme Court has banned export of iron ore form this region and for the past four years, no export has taken place. It also predicts, “in all probability, the proposed rail line is not likely to have any iron ore cargo available for transportation to the ports for exports”.

The proposed rail line will cut across the elephant corridor in two places and will also have adverse impact on the movement of wildlife. The rich biodiversity and endemic species will be lost forever, and the mitigative measures will not be adequate to contain the adverse impact of the project.

The state government while agreeing to this new rail line, will further fragment the forests and expose fresh areas to anthropogenic pressures. However, these appear inevitable given the importance of the line for the state. Obviously, the state government is looking at the short term political and economic gains. 

As against this, the CEC has looked at the long term impact of destroying the fragile ecosystems of Western Ghats that provide shelter for wildlife and meet the ecological needs of present and future generations. This is a landmark decision on environmental governance.  

The death warrant for the two lakh trees stands cancelled due to the report of CEC, and the wildlife gets a breather for the time being. Will the politicians succeed in exerting pressure on Supreme Court to sacrifice the forests at the altar of development, and convert the red signal into green?