Residents of Kannalli village on the northern outskirts of the City have been living in constant fear of attacks by straying leopards. On Sunday evening, they reportedly saw two leopards —  an adult and a cub — devouring a goat. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe incident is not the first of its kind. Villagers said that in the last three months, half-a-dozen similar incidents have occurred and leopards have eaten away cows, goats and even dogs. 

The goat, which became the latest victim, was owned by Shankar who was searching for it after finding it missing on Saturday night. On Sunday morning, he, along with other villagers, found its half-eaten remains a stone’s throw from his home in the middle of a 26-acre farm. Later around 6.30 pm, they spotted a leopard and a cub in the fields. 
The terrified villagers then called the forest department officials. 

“I found the goat’s half-eaten carcass with scattered parts in the fields. I had heard of such incidents but now it happened with me,” Shankar said. “I am scared for my family but cannot move out as I have to stay and make a living here.” 

Shankar works as a watchman for the 26-acre farmland and lives in a small house there, with his family. 

Venkatesh (60), who lives about six kilometres from Shankar’s house, said that he saw two leopards, one full grown and a cub, on Sunday evening. 

Satyanarayana (50), who lives near Shankar’s house, had a similar misfortune last month when he found the remains of his cow. Two of his dogs also vanished that same night and were reportedly eaten by the big cat. “We called the forest officials who came, prepared a report and asked us to call them if the incidents recur,” Satyanarayana said. 

His wife, Baby, said such incidents were unimaginable until a few years ago and there had been a spurt of them in the last three months. 

Many villagers accused forest department of not taking the incidents seriously and doing little for their safety and of their livestock. 

Govinda Raju, Assistant Conservator of Forests, who visited the site, said the area was being combed and attempts were on to catch the animal alive. Meanwhile, the department warned the villagers of Malathahalli against doing anything detrimental to the leopard. 

Monitoring movement

G S Prabhu, Principal Chief Conservator of Forest and Chief Wildlife Warden, said the department was monitoring the leopard’s movement. “We have paid compensation to the livestock’s owners. The villagers planned to poison the carcass and kill the leopard. We have warned them against it,” he told Deccan Herald. 

The leopard, at least, has taken shelter in the village which adjoins a forest patch contiguous to Savanadurga forest and the department plans to bait the animal so that it can be driven into the forests. “We cannot capture the animal as the cubs will be in danger,” he added. The department would reward anyone who regularly provides information about the leopard, he added.