Cooperation Minister H S Mahadev Prasad on Saturday said, “The state government will send a proposal to the Centre seeking the latter to declare Male Mahadeshwara (MM Hills) Wildlife Sanctuary and Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary (CWS) in the district as ‘tiger reserves’.” 

ADVERTISEMENTThe minister was speaking to reporters after inaugurating a newly constructed entrance gate to Biligiri Rangaswamy Temple (BRT) Tiger Reserve near Hondarabalu in the taluk. 

After a final examination, a proposal will be sent to the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA), he said.

The minister said that a draft has been prepared on the ecology of MM Hills and it will be submitted to the Centre after eliciting people’s feedback to declare it as an eco-sensitive zone. 

“The state has three months time to submit the draft and the Forest department will gather people’s feedback through discussion with environmentalists, scientists and villagers in this regard,” he added.

Blackbuck sanctuary

As the population of blackbuck has increased in Ummatthur-Jannur forest area in Chamarajanagar taluk, there is a proposal before the government to declare the region as Blackbuck wildlife sanctuary, Prasad said and added that the senior officials of the Forest department have inspected the region and a final decision will be taken soon.

Coconut procurement 

The Cooperation minister said that the government has opened coconut procurement centres in six districts across the state under Karnataka State Cooperative Marketing Federation.

“Coconut growers are suffering huge loss due to price crash and thus the government has opened coconut procurement centres to lend a helping hand to them. The centres will buy unhusked coconut at the Rs 1,600 per quintal. Chamarajanagar, Hassan, Tumakuru, Udupi, Uttara Kannada and Shivamogga districts have been sanctioned Rs one crore each to purchase coconuts from growers. Farmers can sell coconuts to the procurement centres after registering their names at the centres by producing land documents (RTC) and an acknowledgment copy issued by assistant directors of Horticulture of respective districts,” the minister said.