A take on comedy

ADVERTISEMENTWatch ‘Funny People’ on January 30 at 3 pm on Zee Studio. In this flick, George Simmons (played by Adam Sandler) is a successful stand-up comedian who learns that he has a rare blood disorder and less than a year to live. 

When he meets Ira (essayed by Seth Rogen), a struggling comedian at a comedy club, George hires him to be his personal assistant and the opening act at his performances. The duo forge a close friendship as George mentors Ira in his career and Ira helps George find closure in his legacy. But soon, George learns that his illness has gone into remission and an ex-girlfriend (portrayed by Leslie Mann) re-enters his life. 

This inspires him to reevaluate what is important to him and what truly gives meaning to his life.

On a wild mission

Tune in to ‘Jeff Corwin Experience’ on January 30 at 9 pm on Animal Planet. 

The popular globetrotting naturalist, wildlife expert and star of the jungle, Jeff Corwin, is back and is on a mission. 

Each episode of the show is a fast-paced exploration of a distinctive aspect of animal behaviour, including sound, smell, attack, defence, survival and more. Jeff travels the world in search of creatures that take these behaviours to the extreme. 

Treat for cricket enthusiasts

Catch cricket in its classic avatar — gully cricket — in ‘Howzzattt’. Combining cricket with animation, this show brings family and friends together to enjoy the exciting series. Tune in to the show as it unfolds the story of the victory of good over evil in an engaging narrative for the kids. The show airs on January 30 at 1.30 pm on Discovery Kids.

A world of robots

Real Steel’ stars Hugh Jackman, Dakota Goyo, Evangeline Lilly, Anthony Mackie and Kevin Durand. A gritty, white-knuckle action ride set in the near-future — where the sport of boxing has gone high-tech — ‘Real Steel’ is about Charlie Kenton, a washed-up fighter who lost his chance at a title when 2000-pound, eight-foot-tall steel robots took over the ring. Now nothing but a small-time promoter, Charlie earns just enough money piecing together low-end robots from scrap metal to get from one underground boxing venue to the next. When Charlie hits rock bottom, he reluctantly teams up with his estranged son Max to build and train a championship contender. 

As the stakes in the brutal, no-holds-barred arena are raised, Charlie and Max, against all odds, get one last shot at a comeback. Tune in to the flick on Star Movies at 12.33 pm on January 30. 

Full of curious questions

The Winter People’ airs on MGM at 9 pm on January 30. In autumn, Sarah and her mother go to their Cape Cod summer house to get the place ready for the winter. 

Sarah is curious to know about the winter people — the ones who live in the house during winter. She asks her mother about them, but the latter dismisses the questions. Sarah finds a tube of unfamiliar lipstick in the house and her mother says that it probably belonged to her father’s girlfriend — her parents have recently separated. Sarah continues to ask about the winter people but can’t seem to find the answers. The film stars Rachel Harker, MacKenzie Nimmo, Ken Cheeseman and Frank T Wells.

Cultural and aesthetic delights

Bazaar is the ultimate television guide to shopping around the planet. In this show, travellers guide viewers through the cultural and aesthetic delights of some of the world’s most renowned cities. Tune in to the show for a glimpse of some of the most vibrant and exciting places on the planet. Bazaar airs on TLC at 9 pm on January 30. 

(tv show timings are subject to change)