On a sunny morning in October 2014, Christopher Schmidt strolled onto  the grassy fields of Magazine Beach in Cambridge, Massachusetts. To get  a better view of the fall scenery, he launched his drone, a DJI Phantom  quadcopter equipped with a camera.

ADVERTISEMENTThen he saw it: a  juvenile red-tailed hawk circling nearby. Within seconds, it swooped  down and flipped the drone midair. Schmidt cut the propellers, and the  bird flew off, apparently uninjured. The drone dropped to the ground,  undamaged.

Schmidt, 31, posted a drone’s eye video of the  encounter on YouTube. In other videos, ospreys, magpies, sea gulls and  geese pursue and attack drones in flight. With a hop and punch, a  kangaroo knocks one to the ground. A cheetah chases, leaps and swipes at  one. A pugnacious ram head-butts a drone that hovers too low. And a  particularly defiant chimpanzee at a zoo in the Netherlands whacks a  buzzing intruder out of the sky with a branch.

As drones become  smaller, cheaper and easier to operate, animals increasingly must  contend with airborne paparazzi. Recreational drone users have driven  lounging seals and their pups into the ocean and frightened otters into  diving at Morro Bay, said Scott Kathey, the federal regulatory  coordinator of the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary in California.  In June last year, the National Park Service prohibited the use of  unmanned aerial vehicles in its parks, in part because drones had  disturbed bighorn sheep and other animals.

Such interactions have  alarmed wildlife biologists — even as more of them are turning to  drones to study animals. The devices can be safer, less expensive and  often less disruptive than, say, a helicopter, jeep or boat. Sometimes  it works, sometimes not. Drones have helped scientists unobtrusively  survey penguins, leopard seals and dugongs. But the small size and  agility of drones  can be uniquely irksome, even dangerous, to wildlife.  

Bears, deer, coyotes and other species living on the borders of  civilization have learned to tolerate and take advantage of human  technology, prying open trash cans and leaping fences to get a meal.  Drones, however, are not just another stationary component of human  society. They are designed to be our avatars and go where we cannot.  Scientists aren’t sure how easy it will be for animals to adapt.