When concerned citizens of an apartment complex on Hosur Road attempted to translocate a troop of monkeys from their area to a forest, little did they know that they would attract the wrath of the Forest department.

ADVERTISEMENTActing swiftly, the Forest Mobile Squad and the Urban Wildlife warden swept into the grounds of the Lakshmi Symphony apartment on Saturday, rescuing 22 bonnet macaques (monkeys) which had been captured and were in the process of being moved into a mini-van by Ramu, an Andhra Pradesh native and self-professed monkey-catcher. 

According to the residents, they had hired Ramu to capture, cage and translocate the animals to a forest. Wildlife officials, however, see it differently. 

It is against the law for any private individual to capture a monkey, and an FIR has been booked against Ramu and the vice-president of the apartment association. According to Forest department officials, bonnet macaques are Schedule II animals and enjoy the status of absolute protection.

 “Only in extreme cases and with the permission of the Chief Wildlife Warden can such monkeys be moved from their original habitat,” a source said.

The monkeys were later released at the Cauvery Wildlife division at Sangama near Srirangapatna.

Sources said that the continued urbanisation of Bangalore — especially by residential complexes — has served to reduce the natural habitat of local wildlife, including monkeys. 

Residents of outlying apartment complexes either complain of being attacked by these primates or having their homes intruded by them, sources added. The Forest mobile squad and the BBMP forest cell have received many complaints, but generally there is no follow-up either by the complainant or by the department. 

According to an official from the Forest department, monkeys are very much part of the urban ecosystem and said that their habitat cannot be disturbed. “We need to learn to live in harmony with them,” he added.

“Monkeys have religious significance and there are many residents in Bangalore who feed them as well.  However, there are also other contributory factors like improper garbage management by residents wherein food is thrown everywhere, inviting not just dogs but also monkeys.”

He also pointed out that the reduced tree cover in the City has forced monkeys to stray into houses for food, which has now become a matter of serious concern.