To ensure animals do not escape from their cages, the Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP) is replacing old-style pulley and weight enclosures with new-age lock crates. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe decision comes weeks after a four-year-old male leopard escaped from the BBP’s rescue centre in the early hours of February 15, 2016. The leopard, which was nicknamed Rishi, had strayed into Vibgyor High school in Marathahalli, southeast Bengaluru, on February 7, 2016, and injured several people, including wildlife conservationists. But it was caught and sent to the BBP later. 

The leopard, however, sneaked out of the rescue centre holding area, squeeze cage and kraal area. It then leapt from a 25-foot-high fence and made its way to the abutting Bannerghatta National Park. The animal’s escapade embarrassed the BBP administration and even led to a criminal case being filed against it. 

Ravi Ralph, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife), and the Zoo Authority of Karnataka formed a five-member committee to investigate the case. The probe report blamed among other things improper cages for the animal’s escape. Based on this, the BBP chalked out a plan to replace the old cages. 

In the old system, the pulley and weight through which enclosure gates open and close were attached to the corridor boundary wall of the housing area. In the new system, they will be attached to the enclosure gate. The gatekeeper has to lift the weight to open the gate and drop it to close the gate. The gates have to be locked when opened and closed. 

In the old system, the front gate of the enclosure had only one lock. In the new system, it has a three-tier locking system: front and two sides. The sliding gates between two enclosures also have locking devices. 

BBP Executive Director Santosh Kumar said the new tiger enclosure had been fitted with new locking gates and housed five cages. 

The rescue centre has five tiger and 12 lion houses with each house having six rooms. There are also four enclosures in the zoo. Leak points in the kraal area are also being fixed, and bolts and joints being replaced. 

The locking system will be replicated in all animal houses. Replicating it in each house will cost Rs 80,000-90,000. The locking system was to be installed by March, but administrative and financial procedures delayed it. 

The full-fledged work will start on April 1 and will be completed in a month, Kumar said, adding that there will be “no room” for errors.