Heavily used infrastructure through protected areas and reserves, loss of corridors and conflicting cropping pattern on the edge of the forests are the main reasons for human elephant conflict in any area. Apart from southern states of Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu, some human dominated landscapes of Uttarakhand, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Odisha and West Bengal are affected by human-elephant conflict.  

The responses of human vary in different regions. While in the southern states, the public is generally aggressive and target the elephant herd with the gun shots, tribals in Jharkhand and Sarguja region of Chhattisgarh never show any aggression and do not use gun during anti-depredation operation. It has been observed during my tours to Jharkhand and Uttarakhand that villagers do not have a tendency to chase the herd. By and large, they clear the passage and elephants move away silently. Whenever elephants were chased violently, using sound crackers etc, a lot of damage to mud houses were inflicted.

Elephant herds straying in human-dominated landscape move during nights and damage crops and other properties while they hide themselves in groves during day time. Elephant herds also stay in coffee estates such as in Kodagu and Hassan in Karnataka where estate owners open fire at them while chasing as against the normal practice of Forest Department using crackers to chase them. Bullet injury in some cases leads to septicemia, which is followed by maggot formation and ultimately the death of the elephant. 

Some of the land owners on the fringes of the elephant reserves protect their crop by running a wire on the periphery of the field and connecting the wire illegally with the nearest power line. Many a times, elephants straying in such landscapes touch the wire and get electrocuted. In the morning, when forest officers reach the spot, they find that the wires are removed and there is hardly any direct evidence to take up a criminal case against the accused persons. Land owners booked in such cases have succeeded in going scot free as the conviction rate is hardly 10%. There is therefore, no deterrence and the crime goes on unabated.

In Purulia, Bankura and Midinapur districts of southern West Bengal, tribals target the elephant herds with the bow and arrow. Once again, the injury leads to septicemia. 

Identifying the culprits in these cases is difficult. The question of booking them and securing conviction is further difficult. The villagers’ retaliation is also on account of Forest Department’s apathy towards the suffering of the people owing to death and crop losses. 

Adequate and timely compensation should be provided and next to kith and kin should be consoled by senior officers in all death cases. I found compensation being paid in Uttrakhand in human death/injury cases even inside the forests which is against the norms in other states. 

Attempts are made by forest departments across the states to construct and maintain barriers to prevent straying of wild elephants outside forests. Elephant-proof trenches and solar powered fences constructed on the periphery of forests have been rendered ineffective for variety of reasons. Each village has people with conflicting interests. While one group would fill up trenches to provide passage for themselves for collection of fuel wood and for their animals to graze, other group would advocate maintenance of barriers for their crops. 

Now, the Forest Department is adopting more expensive barriers such as concrete structures and rails etc. In Uttarakhand, elephant proof walls are being built on the periphery of forests.

Different experience

During my tour to Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh on management effectiveness evaluation of some sanctuaries, I was pleasantly surprised to have a different experience altogether. Tribals in Sarguja region of Chhattisgarh never target the elephants with bow and arrow or gun shot.  They use crackers and make noise to chase the elephants. Some of the herds are found establishing their home ranges in Tamor Pingala sanctuary of Surajpur district. 

The examination of elephant dung in this sanctuary reveals that leaves, bark, fruits and roots of tree species such as Chloroxylun Swetinea, Cochlospermum Relegiousom, Boswellia Serrata, Ziziphus Moritiana, Bredellia Retusa are consumed by elephants. The dungs were located in patches where the trees of above mentioned species were damaged and uprooted by elephants. It is concluded by the experts that a herd of 15 elephants have established Tamor Pingala sanctuary as their home range.

In Khunti district of Jharkhand, 35 km from Ranchi where River Subarnarekha takes birth, there is a cluster of villages surrounded by forests having relatively higher elephant density. These villages are Lohagirvi, Derang, Churdag, Jeetpur, Telo, Mahuatoli situated in Torpa block of Kunti district. Wildlife conflict cases of these villages are dealt in Giriga Range of Kunti Forest Division. The Oraon, Korva and Munda tribes are the inhabitants of these villages. They have great sense of responsibility towards environment and do not like to harm forests and wildlife in any way. 

The tribes argues that the elephants have right over the crop as cultivation is done in areas originally belonging to them. They do not claim any compensation for the damages done by elephants to their crops and any other properties. They also do not show any action in retaliation of any human death caused by elephants. If in a particular year, elephants have not raided their paddy crop, they do not commence harvest. On the contrary, they request range forest officer of Giriga Range to drive herds to their paddy field so that the elephants get their share and remaining crop can be harvested. 

The example of these villages of Khunti district should be spread in heavy conflict areas whenever state forest departments take up education and awareness program for conservation of wildlife. ADVERTISEMENT(The writer is retired Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, Karnataka)