Residents of Sukhdev Vihar and adjoining areas are exposed to toxic air due to gases and respirable particles emanating from the Okhla waste-to-energy plant. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe plant, situated merely 200-metres away from the south Delhi colony, is operating without clearance from the Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC). 

The Okhla Bird Sanctuary and two major hospitals are also precariously close to it.  

The toxins are a result of mass burning of unsegregated waste in the plant operated by the Jindal Group and the South Delhi Municipal Corporation. This month, the colony was covered with layers of ash and smoke. 

The local residents are worried about possible hazards due to the plant.

“It is burning unsegregared waste, including mandi waste, electronic waste, plastic and everything else. The by-product coming out is very toxic,” said Ranjit Devraj, a Sukhdev Vihar resident. 

The plant is currently converting around 2,000 tonnes of waste to energy.

“It is impossible to segregate this much waste at the site,” Devraj said, adding that the South Corporation is responsible for waste segregation. 

The most serious threat to the residents is the emission of hazardous gases like dioxins and furans, which are released due to burning of plastic. 

In fact, two hospitals – Fortis Escorts Heart Institute and Holy Family – situated near the plant have written to the Prime Minister to shut it down as it causing problems to their patients. 

Lawyer Gaurav Bansal, who is representing the residents in the National Green Tribunal (NGT), said the plant did not even take permission from the National Board of Wildlife even though it is situated in proximity to the Okhla Bird Sanctuary. 

A petition by the Sukhdev Vihar Residents’ Welfare Association on this is being heard by the NGT.

Although a green court-ordered inspection is being carried out by the authorities, residents feel only an immediate solution will save them from inhaling the toxic gases.

“Inspection has been ordered so many times. The plant has failed a series of tests by DPCC, CPCB and independent agencies, but it is still running,” Devraj said. 

A petition was first filed in the Delhi High Court in 2009, following which it was transferred in the NGT. 

The NGT on Thursday formed a high-powered team to inspect the plant along with similar plants coming up in the capita, and to ensure that it caps emission of ash or  particulate matter.