An “illegal” resort being constructed in the Dandeli Tiger Reserve for the last three years has caught the attention of environmentalists and forest officials. 

ADVERTISEMENTAccording to Dandeli-based conservationist Shankar, Trinity Jungle Resort is being constructed on three acres of land at Anmod village, which is within the Castle Rock Range of the Dandeli Tiger Reserve. Construction is almost complete and some patches of forest land have already been burnt down to build cottages, Shankar added. 

The project, undertaken by the Mumbai-based Jatoyah Investments and Holding Limited, will come up in Survey Number 83B in Anmod  village. The resort will have ten cottages and amenities such as a swimming pool etc. 

Anmod village is an enclosure within Dandeli. Under Section 33 (a) of the Wildlife Protection Act 1972, all commercial tourism activities are prohibited in this area. Further, according to Forest officials, neither the Forest Department nor the National Board for Wildlife has given permission for the project. 

The Karnataka Wilderness Tourism Policy also states that resorts cannot be permitted inside national parks, wildlife sanctuaries, tiger reserves or their enclosures. The area surrounding the resort is the natural habitat for tigers, leopards, elephants and many other wildlife species. The area also serves as a link between Dandeli-Anshi Tiger Reserve and Bhimgad Wildlife Sanctuary in Belagavi district. 

Speaking to Deccan Herald, Srinivasalu, Chief Conservator of Forests, Dandeli Wildlife Circle, said: “We have asked the resort owners to show us all permission documents required to build the resort. 

Since this area was brought under the Dandeli reserve only last year, resort owners say they obtained permission to build the resort before that. We have also seized all construction material and no construction work 

In the past, Forest officials have taken stringent action against illegal resorts and homestays in this region. In May 2012, Madan Nayak, Assistant Conservator of Forests, Dandeli sub-division, was beaten to death when he tried to stop tourists from feeding crocodiles in a resort on banks of Kali River. Though this resort was closed down, no follow-up action has been taken to evict other existing illegal resorts or stopping new ones from coming up.