The Expenditure Finance Committee of the Delhi government on Tuesday sanctioned 23 projects amounting to Rs 440 crore, including 20 projects of the public works department and one each of the forest department, social welfare department and irrigation and flood control department. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe projects were sanctioned at a meeting of the EFC chaired by chief minister Sheila Dikshit and attended by revenue and health minister A K Walia, PWD minister Raj Kumar Chauhan and social welfare minister Kiran Walia.

Dikshit said roads transferred by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi to the PWD were not in a good shape and needed urgent improvement. They also need to be widened, she said.

“The PWD has taken up this matter on a priority basis to upgrade these roads to ensure smooth flow of traffic, apart from presenting a better image of Delhi roads,” said Dikshit.
“A major component of the work will include all civil, electrical and horticulture projects, and improvement of sidewalks as well,” said Dikshit.

The roads that are being upgraded include 11 in Trans Yamuna, two in north and north-west Delhi and seven in south and south-west districts.

The cost break-up of Trans Yamuna is Rs 148.55 crore. In north and north-west Delhi, it is Rs 28 crore, and in south and south-west areas, the cost is Rs 54.42 crore. Dikshit said she is confident that the projects will be completed within the shortest possible time to provide relief to commuters.

Homes for mentally-ill

The EFC also sanctioned Rs 47.63 crore for construction of five homes for mentally-challenged persons, who have recovered substantially but still need care. The construction of such homes is probably the first of its kind in the country. 

“This is a unique initiative that will provide facilities to mentally-ill persons who are on their way to becoming normal,” said Dikshit.

Funds for revitalising degraded forest land in Asola Bhatti Wildlife Sanctuary and Dera Mandi were also sanctioned. “It is a challenging job. As the areas are rocky and spread out, it requires extra labour and attention,” said Dikshit.

“The forest department has submitted a proposal to extend the project from April 1 this year to March 31, 2017.”

According to Dikshit, it will also help protect government land from encroachment and illegal mining. “Under the extended period, an Eco Task Force will ensure plantation of 7.5 lakh saplings on 470 hectares at Asola Bhatti, Dera Mandi and Ghitorni,” she added.

A project by the irrigation and flood department for constructing a parking lot at Old Seelampur village in the congested Gandhi Nagar area was also considered. The EFC approved its revised cost from Rs 4.07 crore to Rs 5.97 crore.