An image of a shrub in the foreground, a smiling face on a windowed wall and three faces popping out of a black curtain won the first, second and third prizes respectively in the student category as part of the seventh edition of Canon Photomarathon. Mouli Joshi from Bluebells International School, Udit Murarka from Modern School Barakhamba Road and Aniket Joshi from Mount Carmel School were part of the introductory special category for the amateur photographers aged between 12-17 years in the annual contest. Over 200 students from 17 schools participated and captured their perspective of the theme ‘Expressions’ in a period of 90 minutes. 
“We want photography to grow in India. We understand that youth is interested in photography with the advent of new technology and rising awareness,” said Eddie Udagawa, vice president, Consumer Imaging and Information Centre, Canon India.While for the students’ category, there was only one theme, for rest of the contestants, there were two themes — ‘Flavours of Delhi’ and ‘Peace’. 
“The pictures were judged by well-known photographers including wildlife photographer Shivang Mehta and lifestyle photographer Ravi Dhingra.  They were judged on their creative, technical and narrative sense,” informed Udagawa. The highlight of the event was the grand prize which was an all-expenses paid trip to Canon Japan’s Photo Clinic (photo workshop). The second and the third winners were awarded EOS 5D Mark IV and EOS 80D respectively. 
Additionally, there were prizes for theme-based winners and students’ category. Capturing the haze at Delhi’s Nigambodh Ghat and a pigeon with a photograph of Mother Teresa, freelance photographer Nisanshay Sardana was declared the winner in the general category for both the themes. 
“Flavours of Delhi is often associated with food. I wanted to show another aspect of Delhi, and the smog that is prevalent these days, became the subject. And peace is synonymous with both The Mother and pigeon, so it just struck me at that point of time,” Sardana told Metrolife.
“India is a picturesque land with 35 world heritage sites and Indian photographers are only growing in the passion for their craft. So such platforms can give them an unequivocal voice,” said Udagawa.