After introducing the novel concept of night tourism, Rajasthan will now throw open the excavated remains of Indus Valley Civilization for tourists.

ADVERTISEMENTThe Archaeological Survey of India is planning to open 5,000-year-old Kalibangan site for tourists. Kalibangan is the part of Indus Valley Civilisation that was in Hanumangarh district of Rajasthan and was excavated in 1960.

Officials in the Archeological Department said initially some portions of the excavated site may be opened to visitors. The entire site comprises pre-historic mud-brick and it is too fragile to withstand footfalls. The site will be opened only after ensuring proper protection to the prehistoric structure.

“Kalibangan is the world famous archeological site in Hanumangarh district. Archaeological Survey of India is planning to open some portions of it for the tourists. With such an initiative, Hanumangarh may become a major tourist site. We need to focus on creating basic infrastructure for the tourists, which includes good hotels and cafés,” said P C Kishan, Hanumangarh collector.

Kishan informed that ASI is also planning to open 1,700-year-old Bhatner Fort also in Hanumangarh district.

Besides, the old museum in Hanumangarh displaying Harappan finding will also be opened for visitors. “The Bhatner Fort was constructed by Bhati Rajput rulers and it is considered to be one of the oldest forts in India. Both the fort and the museum will be first improved and later, it will be opened for the visitors,” said an ASI official.

District animals
In yet another initiative, the state government has decided to declare a district animal or district bird for all the 33 districts in the state. The decision was taken at a recent meeting of Rajasthan Wildlife Board chaired by Chief Minister Vasundhara Raje.

Raje directed officials to identify the animals and birds, and later associate them with each district. Every district will have to ensure their full protection and treat them on the lines of the national animal or bird. The initiative will protect wildlife in the districts and boost wildlife tourism simultaneously.

Tourism Department sources said the wildlife board has also proposed to establish a new tiger park on Aamali village of Tonk district. Tiger population in Ranthambore National Park has increased in the last few years.