Malnad Janahitha Rakshana Vedike and Malnad Janti Kriya Samithi staged a vehicle jatha against the proposed Elephant Corridor Project — to be undertaken by the Wildlife Division of the Forest Department.ADVERTISEMENTThe vehicle jatha which was flagged off at Aniyoor near Neriya passed through Miyar, Kayarthadka, Arasinamakki, Shishila, Shibaje, Udane, Shiradi, Gundya, before culminating at Subrahmanya. 

Addressing the public rally at Subrahmanya, former Chief Minister D V Sadananda Gowda has affirmed that the State government will not allow the implementation of those projects which help to protect wild animals at the cost of farmers. The government opposes those projects which are against the interest of the people.

Hence, the government will take a decision to drop the Elephant Corridor project in the coming Assembly session, at Belgaum.

Speaking about his talk with the State Forest Minister, he said that he has told the Forest Minister to take the decision only after the respective officers meet the people of 18 project-affected villages. The Minister has agreed to the plea and the government will definitely not take any decision without the public approval. 

“The UNESCO team that visited India in 2010, carried out a survey and had recommended that 39 forests including Pushpagiri, Brahmagiri, Talacauvery, Kuduremukh, Someshwar, Agumbe, Balehalli could be added to the Elephant Corridor project. The report was submitted to the Central government, which in turn forwarded it to the State government for examination. The State government took a resolution in the Assembly and rejected the project report by considering the harm the project would pose on farmers. Gram Sabhas will be conducted in Subramanya in the presence of the Forest Minister and collective opinion will be considered,” promised DVS.

MP Nalin Kumar Kateel who was present at the programme, too said that the leaders will not allow the implementation of projects that would adversely affect the farmers.
Earlier, flagging off the jatha, Zilla Panchayat President Koragappa Naik said that the members of Malekudiya tribe and other villagers from areas that come under the Elephant Corridor Project have been residing in the village for generations and are eking out their living by taking up agriculture activities. There is a need to fight unitedly against the proposed project. 

Vedike convener Kishor Kumar Shiradi said that the authorities have issued notices to the villagers residing in those villages coming under the project area, in Sakleshpura. Following the protest staged by the public, projects like Pushpagiri sanctuary, Greater Talacauvery projects have been withdrawn. 

A few are trying to misguide the protest, by stating that the project will not be implemented. 

BJP leader from Dharmasthala Krishnappa Bengala expressed fear over losing lands to the proposed Elephant Corridor. If the project is implemented, then thousands of villagers will lose their sources of livelihood. 

The government which has been promising to distribute compensation, has failed to distribute title deeds to the farmers. 

Taluk Panchayat President Keshava M, ZP member Dhanalakshmi Janardhan and others were present.