In clear violation of the Project Elephant Guidelines, 2008, a heavily pregnant elephant, Chaitra, was made to take part in the Dasara procession in Mysuru on October 23. Five days later, she gave birth to a calf at the Bandipur elephant camp, where she has been held captive among seven other elephants. 

The Forest Department transported two cow elephants — Chaitra and Durga Parameshwari, both in advanced stages of pregnancy — to participate in Dasara. While Durga was kept out of the procession, Chaitra was not. Both elephants gave birth to calves days after Dasara. 

The 44-year-old elephant, Chaitra, was 18 months pregnant and went into premature delivery after Dasara celebrations. Ever since she delivered the calf, she has been chained next to the official quarters of the Conservator of Forests and Director of Bandipur Tiger Reserve (BTR) B B Mallesh, as per his “strict orders”, members of the camp staff told Deccan Herald on condition of anonymity. 

Her calf is forced to stay by her despite the heavy rainfall which has been lashing Bandipur for the last few days. Though other elephants are let free into the forests at night — which is an everyday routine — Chaitra is not. She is chained 24/7, according to the staff at the camp. 

Religious practices 

What’s more, Mallesh is enforcing religious practices upon the elephants, according to the camp staff. The officer has ordered that all elephants at the camp be bathed and anointed with ‘Om’ on their foreheads every day. The elephants are also required to “salute” him. He then feeds them jaggery and bananas. 

On Thursday, Mallesh took things a step further. All elephants were decorated and lined up so that he could himself perform the ‘puja’ to mark Deepavali. He has even banned cooking of non-vegetarian food and egg anywhere on the camp premises, the staff said. 
Suparna Ganguly, Honorary Secretary, Compassion Unlimited Plus Action (CUPA), Bengaluru, expressed shock that the department had transported pregnant elephants to Mysuru. 

Violation of guidelines

“This is a clear violation of the guidelines. Chaitra could gave gone into premature delivery because of the stress. It is also shocking that the mother and calf are being ill-treated like this. The elephant needs to be let into the forests for forage and to orient her calf to the wilderness. Such religious practices in forest camps are unheard of. The officer should prove it by the book of law why he is indulging in such arbitrary practices,” she demanded. 

When contacted, Ravi Ralph, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife), claimed ignorance about the happenings at Bandipur but promised to look into the matter if he received a written complaint.

 He also said the department had formed a committee that was responsible for having allowed transport and participation of Chaitra in Dasara. 

Department veterinarians said they were not even aware that Chaitra was pregnant. 
Despite repeated attempts, Mallesh was not available for comment. 

Guidelines for care and management of captive elephants, Ministry of Environment and Forests, Project Elephant, 2008: 

Cow elephants in advanced stage of pregnancy shall not be transported by trucks 
 No owner shall put to work any elephants having pregnancy of 12 months or above. 
 Using “peti” (belly band) on cow elephants in advanced stage of pregnancy is prohibited. 
 Marching pregnant elephants over long distance or long duration at a stretch is prohibited.