MSc courseADVERTISEMENTUniversity of Sheffield is inviting applications for MSc Cognitive and Computational Neuroscience course starting in September 2018. For more details, visit www.bit.ly/2FFAyug.MSc Software DevelopmentThe University of Strathclyde, Glasgow is inviting applications for MSc Software Development course starting in September 2018. For more details, email cis-pgtadmissions@strath.ac.uk.Graphic Design internshipAvocado Tree Digital, a digital consulting company, is hiring interns for Graphic Design profile in Bengaluru. Students can apply by March 10. The stipend is Rs 10,000 per month. To apply, visit www.bit.ly/DH-216.Innovation challengeValeo Group  invites applications for the Valeo Innovation Challenge 2018 from students who have completed their  high school and are studying in university. The last date to apply is March 30. For more details, visit www.bit.ly/2GS2IkP.AEEE 2018Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham invites applications for Amrita Entrance Examination-Engineering (AEEE) 2018 from Class 12 students. The last date to submit the application is March 31. To register, visit www.bit.ly/2oBu5IB. For more details, email admissions@amrita.edu or call +91 422 2685169 and +91 422 2685170.Online coursesEdureka has announced two more courses: 'Robotic Process Automation (RPA) Training Using UiPath' and 'Microservices Architecture Training'. For more details, visit www.edureka.co.Data Science internshipEbisu Technologies is hiring interns for Data Science  profile in Bengaluru. Students with knowledge of  Java, Python, Data Analytics and Hadoop  can apply by March 12. The stipend is Rs 10,000 per month. To apply, visit www.bit.ly/DH-215.Business scholarshipsNottingham University Business School invites applications for New Business School PhD scholarships  2018 from PhD applicants. The last date to apply is March 9. For more details, email www.bit.ly/2G9nxIe.IDEX FellowshipThe IDEX Accelerator  invites applications for IDEX Fellowship 2018 from undergraduate and masters degree applicants. The programme provides a fellowship of six months in Bengaluru. The last date to apply is March 15. For more details, visit www.bit.ly/2oBLj8H.Igniting Minds scholarshipSchindler India invites applications for Igniting Minds Scholarship Programme 2018 from students of Class 10 and 12 who are pursuing a diploma course from Polytechnic or ITI colleges. The last date to apply is March 12. To apply, visit www.bit.ly/2oG8tuP.Research internshipsMitacs has announced a new partnership with Science and Engineering Research Board of India. Through this, graduate students from India and Canada will get the opportunity to reï¬ne their research skills, gain cultural ï¬‚uency, and expand their professional networks during 12- to 24-week research internships. For more details, visit www.mitacs.ca.Research scholarshipsIITB-Monash Research Academy invites applications for IITB-Monash Research Academy PhD Scholarships 2018 from MTech, ME, MSc, BE, BTech, BSc students. The last date to apply is March 11. For more details, visit www.bit.ly/2FaOtKJ.Doctoral scholarshipThe College of Arts and Law, University of Birmingham invites applications for 
Haywood Doctoral Scholarship 2018 from outstanding students who are willing to pursue/already pursuing a doctoral research in the History of Art. The last date to apply is March 2. For more details, visit www.bit.ly/2nWYEJc.IP game design contestASSOCHAM in collaboration with Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion-Cell for IPR Promotion and Management, and ERICSSON invites applications for Intellectual Property (IP) Game Designing Competition 2018 from undergraduates, postgraduates, MPhil and PhD. The last date to submit the application is March 31. For more details, visit www.iprism.co.in.ScholarshipA-1 Auto Transport invites applications for  A-1 Auto Transport Annual Scholarship 2018 from any current, full-time, part-time student of an accredited or non-accredited institute, truck driving school or other logistics programme. The last date to apply is March 10. For more details, visit www.bit.ly/2mGrITV.UNESCO fellowshipUNESCO invites applications for UNESCO/ISEDC Co-Sponsored Fellowships Programme 2018 from students having BSc degree or BA in Economics degree. The last date to apply is April 3. For more details, visit www.bit.ly/1CmpHir.Science Without BordersThe Khaled bin Sultan Living Oceans Foundation invites applications for Science Without Borders Challenge 2018 from  students between the ages 11 and 19. The last date to apply is April 23. For more details, visit www.bit.ly/2n10sgQ.Postdoctoral fellowshipThe Centre of Nanotechnology at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Roorkee invites applications from outstanding and enthusiastic researchers for a postdoctoral  position for working on a project focused on 'Directing iPSCs towards tenogenic lineage using in vitro microenvironment modulators'. The last date to apply is March 10. For more details, visit www.bit.ly/2Cpmg27.NSF scholarshipThe Narotam Sekhsaria Foundation invites application for Narotam Sekhsaria Scholarship 2018 from 
graduate and postgraduate 
students. The last date to apply is March 15. For more details, visit www.bit.ly/2Dvs2A7.Diploma in SCMGlobal Institute of Supply Management (GISM), Benglauru offers Diploma course in Supply Chain Management (SCM) of International Trade Centre (ITC), Geneva. For more details, call 9845915757, 9448071752 or visit www.gismind.org.Global Scholars programmeCargill and Institute of International Education (IIE) invite applications for The Cargill Global Scholars Program 2018 from first or second year UG students. The last date to apply is March 5. For more details, visit www.bit.ly/2GPzJy5.Photography contestNature's Best Photography Asia Awards 2018 invites applications for the photography contest. The photos will need to fall into one of these five categories - wildlife, landscape, ocean, birds, small world, video. The last date to submit the entries is March 31. For more details, visit www.bit.ly/2hIy2pO.Economics scholarshipThe Graduate School of Economic and Social Sciences, University of Mannheim invites applications for the Centre For Doctoral Studies In Economics Scholarship 2018 from PhD students. The last date to apply is March 31. For more details, visit www.bit.ly/2t1qEQK.