Son of a murdered father, Genghis grew up in the unforgiving environment of the Mongolian Steppe. Combining the live-action footage shot in Mongolia with CGI software used in Lord of The Rings, the recreation of battles is taken to a new level in presenting the story of how Genghis conquered an empire greater than the Roman Empire at its peak. But a dark, almost evil reputation also exists. He is often portrayed as a psychopath who killed his brother and ordered the death of his best friend. Is it accurate to remember Genghis as a merciless, brutal butcher? Let the historical facts presented n this definitive film help you decide. Watch the film tonight at 9 pm on Fox History & Entertainment.

Actor turns writer
With a woman protagonist and a perspective that delves deep into the feminine mind, TV actor Mayank Anand’s maiden work deals with the taboo subject of a woman who is in love with a married man. Written in diary form, Love From The Sidelines explores the dark abyss of a relationship — wherein one partner decides which way it should go, and the other one is too much in love to think otherwise. Fast paced and easy to read, Mayank expresses complex feelings in simple diction. Fast paced and easy to read, Mayank 
expresses complex feelings in simple 
diction. Mayank Anand’s is a book 
written for the woman, of the woman. But Anand cautions, “While the book delves deep into the female mind, it is not a handbook on how women think. Rather, the book is about the complexity of relationships and perspectives of the  two genders.”


Into the wild
Defining a new breed of wildlife features, Animal Planet’s Leopard Son was purely shot on location in Africa by closely following a mother leopard and her cub for over three years. These are wild, untamed animals, 
stunningly photographed in 35 mm film in their own habitat. Explore this beautiful story as a year after the wondrous experience, the leopard returns to his mother’s territory, with an unforgettable dramatic turn. Catch the episode on May 17 at 10 pm.ADVERTISEMENT