The CCB sleuths arrested a 27-year-old Nigerian national for drug peddling in T C Palya in K R Puram police station limits on Sunday.

ADVERTISEMENTAccording to police,  the accused Paul Ezenwa was arrested on a tip off. He had come to the City around two years ago on a student’s visa. They have seized 50 grams ganja and five grams of cocaine from him. 

He has revealed that he got the drugs from a Nigerian man called Chigo, a drug peddler in Goa. He used to sell the narcotic substances to college students for a higher price. 

Recently, his passport was seized by the Hoskote police in connection with an attempt to murder case, the police added.

A case has been registered and investigation is on. 2 held for cricket betting 
Two bookies were arrested by the CCB police in connection with cricket betting in DJ Halli on Sunday.

Based on a tip off, the police arrested Muneer Pasha and Sadiq Pasha from their residence in DJ Halli. They seized Rs 34,000 cash, seven mobile phones and a laptop from them. They used to fix the betting price based on the online betting rates. They were caught while betting on the India versus South Africa World Cup match. It is learnt that they were in constant touch with a Rajasthan-based bookie called Rajesh, who is said to be involved in several cricket betting rackets, the police.

A senior police officer said, “Due to the cricket World Cup, a lot of bookies have become active and we are being given information from our informants, based on which they will be arrested. But the main bookies are based in north India. It is a tough task to nab them."

Man ends life

A 25-year-old private company employee committed suicide at his residence on Old Airport Road on Saturday night. 

According to police, Vinod Sirky was a native of Jharkhand. He had come to the City around four years ago and was residing with his wife in a rented house. 

Earlier this month, he, along with his wife, had gone to their native without applying for leave. After he returned, he realised that he was transferred to a different place. He was upset over this and tried to talk to his managers, but in vain. 

On Saturday around 11.30 pm, he came back home and went to his bedroom. His wife, who was cooking, realised her husband was in the bedroom. She tried knocking on the door, but there was no response. When she peeped through the window, she found him hanging from the ceiling, the police said.

The Old Airport police, who visited the spot, found no death note. A case has been registered in this regard.

Held for selling tusks 

The Chennammana Kere Achchukattu police arrested a 30-year-old person and seized two elephant tusks from him. 

According to the police, the arrested has been identified as Kumar, a native of Tamil Nadu. Based on a tip off, the police approached the accused in the guise of customers on Katriguppe Main Road. When they asked him to show the tusks, he was immediately arrested, as soon as he produced them. 

He had bought the tusks from another person, to sell them in the City. A case has been registered under Section 379 IPC Wildlife Act. The police are trying to trace the supplier.