The 200th on wildlife and forest protection.  To showcase symbiosis in nature, the historic Glass House will exhibit representations of rare, endangered or extinct animals, crafted purely from flowers. The theme of the show is conservation. ADVERTISEMENT
“We have a floral hut atop a tree which will carry the message: Save forests and wildlife,” said a senior officer in the Department of Horticulture.  The entrance to the Glass House will host several floral ducks in a pond created solely for this purpose. At another corner, will be flower-crafted representations of endangered giant pandas, jostling for space with extinct reptiles such as dinosaurs.  Orchids will be the backbone of the show, and the staff plans to include indigenous and exotic orchids. Flowers will be brought from as far away as Holland and Hawai. Several Asian and Alstro marian lilies will also be displayed. In addition, several fruit-bearing plants and trees such as sausage trees, Keijelia pinnata, beggar’s bowl, canon ball trees, pterocarpus achinatus and sterpulia foetida (rare botanical species) will be displayed. The event is to be inagurated by Chief Minister Jagadish Shettar. At least six lakh people are expected to visit the show this year. Rare creeper A flowering rare creeper in a garden adjacent to Cubbon Park’s Department of Horticulture will be the main attraction during the flower show this year. The creeper with flame-coloured flowers is already drawing visitors in droves. According to the Horticulture Department officials, the creeper, Red Jadevine, is a native of New Guinea and has flowered for the first time in the City.   “There might be four to five such climbers in Bangalore. Except the one in our department, the rest are all in private collections,” said Dr M Jagadish, Joint Director, Department of Horticulture, who is in charge of Cubbon Park. Dr M Jagadish said such scarlet red is rare in the creepers, and the climber with 200 flower pinnacles resembles the flame of the forest (a tree species with flame like flowers found in India). The plant with a striking vine with woody twining stems is well suited for arches, paragolas and pandals. The creeper was brought from New Guinea a year ago through a collector in the City. Being a heavy creeper, the Red Jadevine needs a large support, with full or partial sunlight with adequate moisture and fertiliser. 
“It can tolerate some drought and light frost. However it is known to grow widely alongside streams and marshy areas,” explained Dr Jagadish.