From myths surrounding the nuclear power project across the world to tiny creatures will be theme of the two-day environmental film festival — ‘Quotes from the Earth’— wherein 25 films by Indian and international film-makers will be showcased.

ADVERTISEMENTThe festival which is to be held from December 6 to 7 at the India International Centre will highlight stark environmental challenges of the present times.

It will showcase 25 films comprising around dozen of international films made in various countries such as the US, France, Australia, and Germany. The films by well-known environmental film-makers like Bedi Brothers, Mike Pandey, Krishnendu Bose, Rita Banerji, Christopher Walker and David Fedele will be a part of the festival. 

“This is the fifth edition. From 18 films in 2004, we now have 25 films in 2012. The films, this year, throw light on four categories of environmental concerns — Earth, water, wildlife and sustainability. All the 25 films have been made in the last two years and hence focus on the most current environmental issues,” said Ravi Agarwal, director of the non-government organisation Toxics Link, which is organising the festival. 

The films, which run from 2 minutes to 75 minutes, deal with contemporary and ongoing important issues such as man-animal conflict, threat to lakes of Kashmir and Manipur, river contamination, impact of mining, struggle to preserve tropical forest, dams and the water crisis.

Issues ranging from farmers suicides to struggle for livelihood, vanishing biodiversity to forest conservation will also be highlighted in them in different genres such as documentary and animation.

The festival will provide a platform to highlight and discuss the ecological imbalances and challenges faced at the national and international level. Agarwal said, “Since its inception the focus and aim of the film festival has been of awareness creation and to create an informed discussion on the issues.”

Some of the films such as Ant Wars from Germany, e-waste Land from Australia and Cotton on My Shroud from India will be screened for the first time.