They belong to two different professions. While Bijoyshree Routray is a seasoned politician-- a former minister and five-time MLA-- Shanti Swarup Rath is a Bhubaneswar -based businessman. Both have one thing in common-- their passion for collecting postage stamps. Both are also members of Eastern India Philatelic Association (EIPA).

ADVERTISEMENTThe EIPA, which is based in Odisha capital, started in 1998. But its founder president Routray had started collecting stamps when he was only seven. And the person responsible for introducing him to this hobby was  his mother. 

“My mother was keen to keep me busy and occupied with some hobby when I was a little child. Therefore, she introdu­ced me to the world of postage stamps. And I have not looked back since,” said the 61-year-old politician whose father was the former chief minister of Odisha, the late Nilamani Routray.

He is now the proud owner of more than one lakh postage stamps of different kinds, sizes and shapes from almost all the countries around the globe besides stamps issued by important international agencies like the United Nations.

The number is expected to go up in the coming days as Routray is still busy collecting  stamps. “The interest and the passion to collect stamps have not died down yet,” he said, adding that he had an ambition to collect stamps of all the countries across the globe, including the “dot island” nations (the island nations which look like a small dot on the world map). 

He has 32 big albums full of stamps whose current market value will be more than Rs 10 lakh. However, after relentlessly continuing with the stamp collection exercise for so many years, Routray, a senior member of the ruling Biju Janata Dal (BJD), is now concentrating more on specific subjects like global warming and wildlife, particularly the endangered species. In fact, his treasure of stamps on global warming had won him an important award at a national exhibition held at Vadodara in Gujarat in 2009. 

Apart from stamps, the senior politician is also having a handsome collection of “maxi cards” --the designed cards issued by international agencies like the World Wildlife Fund to raise funds for preservation of wildlife. He now owns 450 sets of maxi cards.

Like Routray, businessman Rath (48) had also started collecting stamps at a very early age when he was in school. The owner of more than 40,000 stamps, he has also written a book in Odiya titled “Daka Tickata Sangraha” (Postage Stamp Collection) jointly with Dr Bibhudatta Mishra, another member of the EIPA.

Rath is now planning an English version of the book. “The basic aim is to create an interest among  youngsters about stamp collection through the book,” he said. 
Significantly, both Routray and Rath have in their possession very important and rare stamps. These prize collections include a postage stamp carrying the picture of the Father of the Nation Mahatma Gandhi which was issued by the government of India in 1948. The face value of the stamps was Rs 10. However, its current market value hovers between Rs 10,000 and Rs 15,000. 

“It has now become more costlier than Penny Black, the world’s first postage stamp issued in the year 1852,” said Routray. Both he and Rath also own Penny Black whose current market value varies between Rs 8,000 and Rs 9,000.

In this context, they maintained that stamp collection can be turned into a lucrative business. “It can fetch minimum ten per cent return on your investment,” said Rath quoting a calculation made by Stanley and Gibbons (SG), the biggest stamp trading company in the world based in UK. 

Apart from the individual efforts of its members, the EIPA, as an association, has also taken up several steps to encourage youngsters, particularly schoolchildren, to take an interest in the age-old hobby. These steps include forming stamp collectors’ clubs in different schools and holding stamp exhibitions in regular intervals. It had also organised a stamp traders’ meet cum stamp show in capital Bhubaneswar in January this year which was a big hit among the people, especially the schoolchildren.

“At this age of internet and mobile phones when there is a drastic fall in the usage of postage stamps, it is important to create interests and awareness among the people, particularly the youngsters abut the stamp collection hobby,” said association president Routray.

The EIPA, which has already been registered as a society, is now having about 200 members. They include politicians, businessmen, engineers, doctors and bureaucrats. 
“We are hopeful of increasing our membership in the coming days,” said Rath informing that members of the association meet at least once every month to exchange views as well as exchange stamps --a major source for stamp collection.