As the Dasara vacation is coming to an end, the number of tourists visiting Kodagu district is increasing.
 
ADVERTISEMENTThough there was a decline in the number of tourists visiting the district, following row over river Cauvery, the tourism has resumed its pace in the second week of October. 

The number visitors visiting Kodagu has doubled over the years. According to the sources, about 3,000 tourists from Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Kerala and Bangalore have visited the district during the week end. Over 2,400 tourists have visited Kaveri Nisargadhama on Saturday and 1245 tourists have visited Dubare elephant camp. The tourists who first pay visit to Talacauvery, Bhagamandala, Abbey falls, later visit Kaveri Nisargadhama, Dubare elephant camp, jungle lodge and resorts, Bailukuppe Tibetan camp and Harangi reservoir.

Majority of the tourists stay at lodges in Madikeri and Kushalnagar, while a few go for home stays that are located at various parts of the district. Though the number of tourists visiting the district has increased over the years, the district still lacks basic facilities. The public have been demanding good road connectivity, specially to Dubare elephant camp. 

The elephant camp is still the most sought after tourist destinations in Kodagu district. Hundreds of tourists from India and abroad visit daily. The camp has gained popularity in Asia itself. 

Situated amidst lush green forest and on the bank of river Cauvery, this centre is a perfect getaway for the tourists coming from cities. 

The camp accommodates 20 elephants at present. The Jungle Lodge and Resort has made arrangements to offer packages to the tourists which includes, studying elephants, understanding their routine life, food habits etc. 

The package programme which begin at 9.30 am, allows the tourists to bathe the elephants, offer them food with the assistance of mahouts and elephant safari. The elephant safari will be open to the tourists from 10 am to 1 pm.

Deputy Conservator of Forest Dhananjay said that the Department has been stressing on eco-friendly tourism and it has been trying to disseminate information on conserving wildlife and bio-diversity, to the tourists.