Traffic has been one of the banes of modern day Bengaluru and bumper-to-bumper vehicle lines are no more an unusual sight in the ‘erstwhile’ garden city. So how does one pass time while stuck inside a stuffy vehicle?

ADVERTISEMENTLooking around at some good looking specimens of humanity or trying to imagine what you will eat once you are home — these are the generally practiced activities during such trying times. And in a view to make staring at vehicles more interesting, stickers have been pressed into service (pun intended). Bumper or windshield stickers are becoming popular with car owners who want to make their vehicle stand out in the crowd. 

“I always felt that stickers were a great way to give a different look to any vehicle, not just cars,” says Vineeth V, a professional. “There are so many cars of the same make and colour on the roads. So how does one give a unique touch to their vehicle? That’s where stickers help. They talk about you as a person, your likes, your dislikes and so on - just like a tattoo,” he adds.

Cherian Kunnath agrees about the fun factor in stickers. The founder of the online portal ‘www.TheIndianFamilySticker. com’, Cherian has developed an unusual line of stick figures to grace the back of your car. 

“The idea is to choose one stick figurine for each member of the family and stick them together to create your own Indian family sticker. We have a range of characters designed for dads, mums, boys, girls, grandparents and even pets to make sure we don’t leave anyone out,” he says. 

Asked about what prompted him to look at car stickers as a potential business opportunity, Cherian says, “I had just got back to India after doing my masters degree in automotive design from Deakin University in Melbourne. I decided to take a break but that extended way beyond my initial plans and I ended up traveling  aimlessly throughout India. Through these journeys, I would be fascinated by the stickers at the back of cars and trucks. 

The sheer diversity of the messaging and amount of personalisation was something which was unique to India. While the aesthetics were sometimes suspect, the enthusiasm of automobile owners was amazing. Back in Bengaluru, I would spend hours staring at the backs of the cars in front of mine in traffic, hoping for something to brighten up my mood. That gave birth to the idea of the ‘Indian Family Sticker’,” he says. 

His minimalist designs have found favour with many. Which is why even though Balagopal C K doesn’t usually like such additions to a car’s appearance, he couldn’t resist putting up one of a Tamilian guy drinking coffee on his own vehicle. “It struck a chord with me. It was catchy without being over the top and added to the appeal of my car without taking away all the attention from it,” he says. 

So why doesn’t he like the usual varieties one sees on the road? “Most of them are loud and garish. Others are religious. I especially hate the ones behind autorickshaws that have sayings like ‘love is poison’, ‘she cheated me’ and so on,” he adds with a laugh. 

Which is why the characters created by Cherian are hugely popular. 
“In the last year and half since we started, we have added many other characters typical of the Indian cultural milieu like the malayali footballer ‘Pandhukalli Pappu”, the fitness couple of ‘Deadlift Dhananjaya’ and ‘Pilates Priya’, the IT duo of  ‘JQuery Jagdish’ and ‘Python Priya’ among others,” says Cherian. 

Stickers are not just for fun though. They can also be used to spread a message- quietly but efficiently. A good example of this are the Coorg Wildlife Society (CWS) stickers. 

These light green triangular shape stickers were a moving identity card of the people of Kodagu. What started as a way to promote their love for nature and wildlife soon became a trend of such massive proportions that even tourist vehicles entering the place began demanding for them.

“They force one to look at them and think about what the owner of the vehicle is implying. And they are great conversation starters too,” vouches Vineeth.