The greatness of a nation can be judged by the way its animals are treated
— Mahatma Gandhi 

ADVERTISEMENTOne noble way to ensure animal welfare is by making it your career.  The primary quality of a good veterinarian is sensitivity and compassion towards all kinds of animals. Vets do not have the luxury of their patients communicating their predicaments to them verbally. One should be quick and observant in understanding the animal’s body language and identifying problems. 

Skills like multitasking and dexterity go hand-in-hand with the veterinary profession. A great part of the treatment involves educating the animal’s owner. Hence, establishing a good rapport and communication are essential tools of the trade. Good physical stamina always comes in handy as the job may involve intensive field work. It is also a messy job, requiring you to dirty your hands. 

It’s a messy job at times, often requiring you to overcome that germophobe in you. But if you are someone who loves variety and adventure, veterinary science might just be the path for you. Above all, looking at the profession as a service to animalkind is a must-have quality for any veterinarian.

Currently, there are 46 colleges spread across 23 states in India. Karnataka has four veterinary colleges located in Bengaluru, Bidar, Hassan and Shivamogga, all under the Karnataka Veterinary, Animal & Fisheries Sciences University (KVAFSU), Bidar. The colleges are government-run institutions.

Each year, about 80 students are accepted, including aspirants from the agricultural quota, rural quota, All India Pre Veterinary Test (AIPVT) quota and Non-Resident Indian (NRI) quota. The admission process has been based on ranking in the Karnataka Common Entrance Test (KCET) and All India Pre Veterinary Test (AIPVT).

The degree course for veterinary science is ‘Bachelor of Veterinary Science & Animal Husbandry’ (BVSc & AH). The duration of the course is five years, including an internship. The course follows the syllabus prescribed by Veterinary Council of India (VCI).

There are widespread career opportunities available. Under any of the 18 departments, one can opt for the postgraduation course, which is of two-years duration, and for further education, even seek a PhD. The campuses themselves, with a wide variety of natural greenery and farms, are a treat for nature lovers.

Your options

The possibilities as a veterinarian are endless. You could start a private practice, get appointed as a government officer, practise in various animal hospitals/non-governmental organisations, take up research as a scientist in an institute, serve as a teacher of veterinary science in educational institutes, work as a wildlife veterinarian, work in Indian Forest Service sector, work in a zoo or a stud farm, work in various milk co-operatives or food organisations, be an industrial entrepreneur, work as a consultant for vetero-legal cases, work for banks as a consultant for pet insurance, work as an animal nutritionist, work in pharmaceutical industry or even go up the administrative road as an IAS or KAS officer.

A veterinarian’s day is full of new challenges everyday. There is never a dull moment when you are a veterinarian and that’s what makes the vet life so interesting. Under some circumstances, one may not have the best infrastructure or equipment and thus, creativity is required to improvise quick solutions.

Handling agitated or wild animals is a professional hazard. But keeping a clear mind and a steady hand are all that’s necessary. Economic limitations when the owner may not like to go for the best available diagnostic procedures or treatment is a frequent problem. But experience and knowledge help a great deal in these situations. Being able to work with more than one species, from a tiny mouse to the mighty elephant, is definitely daunting.

Apart from steady support financially, a veterinarian receives unconditional love from one’s patients, respect from their owners and the satisfaction of bringing joy to them both. But a veterinarian’s job is not just a job. It is an emotional and spiritual way of life. And if you want to discover the intricacies of the relationship between man, animal and nature, welcome aboard!