Ecotourism in the country has become more tiger-centric over the years. In this context, B K Singh discusses the various issues attached with tiger protection

ADVERTISEMENTDuring the course of Management Effectiveness Evaluation in two tiger reserves, viz Kanha and Bandhavgarh from April 28, 2014 to May 6, 2014, it was observed that the management spends disproportionally more time in sorting out issues relating to the influx of tourists on a day-to-day basis. 

Prior to the issue of guidelines by National Tiger Conservation Authority on the subject in October 2012, the entire extent of critical tiger habitat (core areas) in both the tiger reserves were open to tourists. Tourists were moving in more than 300 vehicles in each of these tiger reserves, until then. 

The ongoing study and the analysis of the available research data on tiger ecology indicate that the minimum population of breeding tigresses, which are needed to maintain a viable population of 80 to 100 tigers (in and around core) require an inviolate space of 800 to 1200 sq km. 

Tiger being an “umbrella species,” this will also ensure a viable population of other wild animals (co-predator and prey), ensuring the ecological viability of the entire area or habitat. Thus, it becomes an ecological imperative to keep the core areas of tiger reserves inviolate for survival of source population of tiger and other wild animals. 

Following amendments in the Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972, core or critical tiger habitat was notified in all important tiger reserves of the country in 2008. Thus, core area of tiger reserves are inviolate and attempts are being made to remove all disturbances and provide higher level of protection. 

To provide inviolate spaces for wildlife, the villages from core or critical tiger habitat are to be relocated after settling the rights under the Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006.

It is also observed that most tourists in tiger reserves like to see tigers. Thus, ecotourism has become tiger-centric. The tourism guidelines, therefore,  provide for establishment of tiger safari in buffer areas of tiger reserves, which experience immense tourist influx in critical tiger habitat for viewing the tiger.

The interpretation and awareness centres are also supported in such buffer areas  for education and awareness for eliciting public support. 

Adverse impact

In view of the fact that tiger density and recruitments are not impacted, permitting up to 20 per cent of the core or critical tiger habitat as a tourism zone should not have an adverse impact on tiger biology needs, provided other prescriptions in the guidelines are adhered to. 

The guidelines conclude that a maximum of 20 per cent of core or critical tiger habitat usage (not exceeding the present usage) for regulated low impact tourist visitation be permitted. Buffer area is also recommended to be restored, after it is brought under the unified command of the Field Director. 

Kanha and Bandhavgarh are world famous tiger reserves, where tourists come from all over the world. Post October 2012,  tourism areas were brought down in critical tiger habitat. Kanha has a core area of 917 sq km, of which 370 sq km was earlier used for tourism, which is now restricted to 184 sq km in Kanha, Kisli and Mukki Ranges. Earlier, 300 tourist vehicles were moving, which has now come down to 140 vehicles (78 in the morning and 62 in the evening) every day. 

Bandhavgarh tiger reserve has 716 sq km of core area where nearly 300 sq km was used for tourism in three core ranges, viz Tala, Magdi and Khitauli. Post October 2012, the tourism zone is now restricted to 146 sq km and number of safari vehicles has been brought down from 300 to 100. Karnataka is using less than 10 per cent core area for tourism in its tiger reserves. 

There is a system of giving full day permits to a few vehicles and photographers who could spend more than 12 hours in the Tiger Reserves of Madhya Pradesh, which, I feel, is not desirable and should be done away with.

Hindrances

Whenever we attempted to shift tribals from the core area of Nagarhole Tiger Reserve, we found several tribal NGOs opposing our move and accordingly the progress was slowed down. Our argument that tiger reserves are to be made inviolate was not accepted. 

We were questioned as to why tourists are allowed in the core area and why many research permits are granted. Thus allowing any tourism in core area would weaken our efforts to make tiger reserves inviolate.

NTCA October 2012 guidelines provide for restoration of buffer by bringing it under the control of Field Director and enhancing the status of protection, improving the habitat through necessary intervention, so that tigers and other wild animals start moving in the area. 

Unlike Karnataka, buffers in Kanha and Bandhavgarh are brought under the unified command of the Field Director. Many NGOs can be involved in planning and implementing eco development and restoration works in villages and providing them alternate livelihood options, so that their dependency on forests is reduced. 

It is further found in Kanha that the  Local Area Committee (LAC) headed by the Commissioner, Jabalpur, has approved alienation of private lands for tourist lodges in several cases in Kanha-Pench corridor. The purchasers have fenced the land. 

Many such island fencing in corridors obstruct the movement of wild animals, which aggravates human wild animal conflict. It is high time that tiger management take adequate steps for conservation and development of the corridors. 

Some of the patches in corridor can also be earmarked for tourism. Similarly the Bandhavgarh-Sanjay Dubri corridor in Madhya Pradesh also needs adequate steps for its conservation and development. 

This corridor is narrow in many places, which must be widened and restored for movement of tiger and other wild animals. Tourism areas should be developed in buffers and corridors connecting the source populations. 

Further, tourism from core is shifted to buffer areas and other peripheral areas, so that core and critical tiger habitats are kept inviolate.