Kodagu, straddled on the Western Ghats, boasts of more than 300  varieties of birds. This pristine area abounds in an assortment of rare  flora and fauna as well. 

ADVERTISEMENTOne of the unique selling  propositions for coffee grown in these environs is that the berries  develop under dappled sunlight filtered through friendly shade trees, to  a medley of melodious sounds of numerous feathered bipeds. 

It  is claimed that these ‘happy’ berries are imbued with the finest  qualities of the salubrious sylvan surroundings. Just as in a popular  commercial for a Scotch that says, “as you sip their whiskey you hear  hundred pipers playing,” the coffee planters in this area market their  produce with the hype that the consumers could listen to chirping of  birds as they savour the brew which is famously known as: the cup that  cheers but not inebriates!  

When it comes to these bright  coloured feathered bipeds, there are two medical doctors in Kodagu who  have evocatively captured the images of local birds in all their  splendour, through different art forms. 

Besides their medical  profession, they are well-known ornithologists as well. The first, Dr S V  Narasimhan, has brought out a bilingual (English and Kannada) book  titled ‘Feathered Jewels of Coorg’ in which he has painstakingly  colour-sketched 310 birds of this region. 
He has meticulously  described each species giving their popular English names along with  their scientific Latin names. Also included are the names of each  species in Kannada as well as in Kodava languages. 

However,  Narasimhan’s efforts go far beyond just documenting bird-life in Kodagu.  He is actively involved in bringing about environmental awareness and  wildlife conservation in a unique way. Every year, Narasimhan  hand-paints thousands of postcards of birds and animals of Kodagu with  specific messages composed by him pertaining to our milieu. 
He then mails them free of cost to a host of recipients. 

His  modest request, however, is for postage stamps so that he could  distribute his hand-painted postcards to even more beneficiaries to  spread his message on conservation and protection of wildlife, so very  crucial to our environment. Narasimhan has, as on date, hand-painted  56,590 cards in a span of 28 years! I am sure it’s a world record. I am  one of the lucky beneficiaries this year. 

Aim and shoot

The  other doctor, Dr Bishan Monnappa, an orthopaedician, is a keen  photographer. He brilliantly captures wildlife in their natural habitat  through powerful cameras.  His high-definition photographs of birds of  various plumages are simply spectacular. 

Dr S V Narasimhan and  Dr Bishan Monnappa are popularly known as ‘Bird-men of Kodagu’. They are  extending their healing touch beyond humans to the wellbeing of Mother  Nature as well. 

Now, who can resist drinking coffee that has bird songs recorded in its brew!