The Forest Department has been chalking out programmes to maintain balance in nature. As part of its programmes, tree parks are being developed in the Dakshina Kannada district.ADVERTISEMENTTo create awareness among people on forest and wildlife conservation, the department proposed to set up six tree parks in the district under the Salumarada Thimmakka Tree Park project, of which two are already open for the public. The remaining parks will open in the next few months. Salumarada Thimmakka Tree Park project was initiated in 2016-17 by the then government of Karnataka. Accordingly, it was proposed to set up 50 tree parks in the state in the next five years. The parks at Thannirbavi and Bantwal has been attracting the public. The remaining parks will come up at Alampuri in Bantwal, Kallugudde in Belthangady, Birumalegudde in Puttur, and on the banks of river Kumaradhara in Subrahmanya of Sullia taluk.The tree parks at Alampuri, Kallugudde and Birumalegudde are situated on the periphery of the forest so that visitors can enjoy nature at its best. About half of the work on these parks have been completed. The land has been identified for the tree park on the banks of river Kumaradhara at Subrahmanya. The survey of the land is also complete.The park is an attempt to strengthen the bond between humans and nature. It also attempts to create awareness on the importance of forest resources.At Thannirbavi, the tree park is spread over two patches of land, one on nine hectares of river-front land and another six hectares on the beach front. The park has plant species from the Western Ghats as well as herbal ones. In addition to Casuarina trees that have been in the area for several years, the department planted trees such as ‘honne’ and others. There is a separate counter to provide information on wildlife and biodiversity.According to DCF V Karikalan, "The Forest department aims to create awareness on forest and wildlife among the people. The tree parks will be dedicated to the general public shortly."The park has a seating arrangement, drinking water facilities, walking path, amphitheatre, medicinal plants and a play area for children.