The construction of resorts by a private company by violating Land Conversion Policy has come to limelight near Channagondanahalli on the foothills of Mullayyanagiri. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe private company named KSS Hotels and Resorts Co. which had obtained permission to develop resort complex in 3561.71 sq ft area has violated the policy by encroaching the land and developing the complex in 4480 sq ft area. 

The company had taken up the work on building a resort in 7.10 acres of land in Survey No. 344 and 216 near Channagondanahalli-Pandaravalli village. The company had already completed the construction of 12 villas and had laid foundation for constructing few more villas. 

Several environmental organisations had raised their concern against the district administration for giving permission to a private company to build resorts in the foothills of Mullayyanagiri which is regarded as the eco-sensitive zone.

 Deccan Herald had reported on the issue recently, following which the departments concerned had woken up, surveyed the land and issued show-cause notice to the company. The Pollution Control Board too has directed the company not to take up any work till the next order is announced.

The Pollution Control Board officers on visiting and inspecting the spot have realised that the company has changed the blue print which was submitted before the land conversion process and is constructing more buildings by encroaching the land. 

The sources say that the Pollution Control Board officers have also issued notice for the lack of scientific management of waste water and materials in the construction site by violating the Water and Air Protection Act. 

Responding to the development, D V Girish from Bhadra Wildlife Conservation Trust and Sridev Hulikere from Wildcat C Trust have demanded the district administration to cancel the sanctioned land conversion in the backdrop of the confirmation on the company violating the policies. 

The KSS company has reportedly not obtained permission from the Forest Department for building resorts. As the land in which the construction work is taking place, is located near Bhadra Tiger Reserve Forest, Shola forest and grassland, the Range Forest Department and Bhadra Wildlife Department should have inspected the spot and stop the construction work, they said and alleged that the Forest Department has tried to remain silent and flee from its responsibility. 

The Forest Department officers should inform the Deputy Commissioner about the construction work, keeping wildlife protection in mind, said wildlife protection activist G Veeresh.