The 10 hibernating little brown bats hang from a corner of their tailor-made refrigeration chamber at Bucknell University like a clump of old potato skins, only less animated. 

ADVERTISEMENTIn torpor, bats become one with their wintry surroundings, their body temperatures falling to just above freezing, their heart rates slowing to one or two beats a minute, their breathing virtually undetectable.

But suddenly, a male yanks himself free of the bunch and hops down to a dish on the floor. After taking a long, slow drink of water, he uses the claws on his folded wings to hoist himself along the wire mesh of the chamber, his motions angular, deliberative and spidery. A second bat rappels down for a drink, and then a third.

“Well, that’s a lucky break,” said Thomas Lilley, a postdoctoral fellow from Finland. As Bucknell’s de facto bat concierge, Lilley helps wild bats acclimate to life in captivity, a difficult task with an urgent spur. 

He and his colleagues are labouring mightily to understand white-nose syndrome, a devastating fungal disease that has killed at least 6 million North American bats since it first appeared in Albany, New York, a decade ago and that threatens to annihilate some bat species entirely.

Because the fungus attacks bats as they hibernate in caves, the researchers are exploring the complex biology of normal bat hibernation, and so-called arousal bouts turn out to be a big part of the puzzle, said Kenneth Field, an associate professor of biology.

Hibernating bats will warm themselves out of torpor every week or two throughout the winter, for several hours at a stretch. Although researchers don’t understand the reasons for the thermal interludes, they have quantified just how important such thaws must be to bat survival.

 “All the work that bats do during the fall, feeding nonstop and putting on fat until they’re like butterballs on wings, and 90 percent is spent to sustain the winter warm-ups,” said DeAnn Reeder, a professor of biology and one of the nation’s leading bat ecologists.

New research suggests that white-nose syndrome begins disrupting the arousal-torpor cycle long before any telltale white fuzz appears on the bat’s face and wings and that the disorder really spins out of control when the bat’s immune system behaves in a distinctly unbatlike manner, mounting a zealous response against the fungal spores. 

Unbatlike because, as scientists are discovering, the bat immune system is astonishingly tolerant of most pathogens - a trait that could pose risks to people but that also offers clues to preventing human diseases of aging, including cancer. 

Evidence is mounting that bats can serve as reservoirs of many of the world’s deadliest viruses, including the pathogens behind Ebola, Marburg and related hemorrhagic fevers; acute respiratory syndromes like SARS and MERS; and even familiar villains like measles and mumps.

Yet, bats appear largely immune to the many viruses they carry and rarely show signs of the diseases that will rapidly overwhelm any human, monkey, horse, pig or other mammalian host the microbes manage to infiltrate. Scientists have also learned that bats live a seriously long time for creatures of their small size. 

The insectivorous Brandt’s bat of Eurasia, for example, weighs an average of just 6 grams, compared with 20 grams for a mouse. But while a mouse is lucky to live for a year, the Brandt’s bat can survive well into its 40s – a disparity between life span and body mass that a report in Nature Communications called “the most extreme” of all mammals.


Researchers are scrutinising bat DNA and the details of the bat vocation for clues to what sets the flying mammals apart from other members of the lactating clade. Preliminary findings indicate that bats’ apparent indifference to the viral throngs they harbour, together with their Methuselah-grade longevity, probably arose from the adaptations needed to grant them the power of flight.

Bat experts argue that a keener understanding of bat biology could not only help prevent the next outbreak of Ebola or other cross-species “zoonotic” infection but also offer a fresh take on immune and inflammatory disorders like diabetes or heart disease. 

Scientists warn against misguided calls in some areas for the culling of bats as a way to combat the risk of viral transmission, and they urge the public not to succumb to old-fashioned bat phobia that long linked bats to witches, vampires, demons and cobwebs.

Bats play essential roles in the environment, researchers said. Insectivorous bats are the top predators of night-flying insects, including mosquitoes: Reeder estimated that for every 1 million bats killed by white-nose syndrome, 692 tons of insects go undevoured each summer. 
Fruit- and nectar-eating bats are major pollinators and seed dispersers. Scientists traditionally have divided bats into two big suborders: the fruit-eating megabats and insect-eating microbats, deeming the groups so distinct they might have evolved flight independently.

Yet, a recent genomic analysis in the journal Science reveals that the ability to fly dates to the earliest days of the bat lineage, some 90 million years ago, and that megas did not split from micros for another 10 million years, after which the micros alone evolved the capacity for echolocation, to help them hunt their insect prey.

Metabolic byproducts

When a bat flies, its heart beats an impressive 1,000 times a minute, and its metabolism ramps up 15-fold over resting rate. By contrast, said David Blehert of the US Geological Survey’s National Wildlife Health Centre in Madison, Wisconsin, the metabolism of a running rodent is seven times normal, “and that’s only for a short burst, whereas a bat can fly at 15-fold metabolic rate for hours.”

All that fiery flapping ends up generating a huge number of metabolic byproducts called free radicals, which could mutilate the bat’s DNA were it not for its extra-strength molecular repair crew. And countering DNA damage happens to be a great strategy for overall health, which could explain bats’ exceptional longevity and apparent resistance to cancer.

Bats often live in colonies of hundreds of thousands. They travel long distances and are exposed to a staggering array of pathogens. They cannot afford to be flustered by every freeloading microbe, and for the most part, they are not.

 That makes the lethality of white-nose syndrome that much more confounding. “Here we have an animal that can survive some of the scariest viruses we know,” Blehert said, “and it’s undone by a common soil fungus.”

His team has found that, starting at the earliest stages of infection, afflicted hibernating bats begin burning twice as much energy as unaffected bats. Reeder and her colleagues have shown that bats with white-nose come out of hibernation twice as often as healthy bats.

And while normal bats spend much of their arousal time resting, “sick bats don’t,” she said. “Instead, they’re grooming constantly, so their arousals are even more costly.” 

The ultimate blow may come from the bats’ immune response to the fungus, which preliminary evidence suggests is unusually strong. “And that,” Field said, “could be what’s dooming the bats.”