Elephant expert Ajay A Desai stressed on the need to have a clear national policy with financial support to manage human-elephant conflict (HEC) effectively.

ADVERTISEMENTAjay Desai, who is the co-chair of IUCN Asian Elephant Specialist Group and a member of the Steering Committee of Project Elephant, Union ministry of environment and forests, was delivering a lecture on HEC at Sri Chamarajendra Zoological Gardens (Mysore Zoo) here on Tuesday. He is also a member of the Task Force set up by the Karnataka High Court to advice on conservation of elephants and management of HEC. The lecture is the fourth one among the monthly interactive conservation education programme ‘Conservation Speak’ series organised by Mysore Zoo on first or second Tuesday of every month.

Decentralisation 

Desai opined decentralisation of powers to decide on eco-conservation would help manage HEC effectively as the state need not look up to the Centre for all trivial issues.
Stating that HEC cannot be solved forever but only be managed, he said neither people nor elephants can be driven out of the areas where there is HEC. “However, creation of new HEC situation can be avoided. For this, there is a need for integrated development planning. Instead of approaching the forest department only for environment clearance for projects in forests — like development of roads, railways, canals, etc — the department should be made a party in planning,” he said.

Damage control

Desai said: “It is not the ones who execute a project or those who derive benefits from a project — related directly or indirectly to forests — who pay the price for the project, but the people and animals who live in the vicinity and conflict managers, who actually pay the price. If the forest department and wildlife experts are involved in planning, with a little extra cost, damage to some extent can be avoided.”

Listing out the factors that aggravate HEC, he said apathy of authorities concerned, poor management, corruption, poor use of science, etc played a big role. “Habitat loss, degradation of habitats, fragmentation of habitats and increase in population of both elephants and people cause HEC.

 From time immemorial, since man started cultivation there is HEC. Human population has tripled since Independence in India, but the population of elephants has reduced to a quarter from one lakh to 25,000 due to various reasons. Thus land use pattern has changed drastically. Upliftment of people living on the fringes of forests and minimising their dependence on forests is one solution. Creation of human areas similar to elephant habitats like coffee, tea, rubber plantations should be avoided,” he added.

Additional chief conservator of forests and in-charge of Project Elephant in Mysore Ajai Misra and executive director of Zoo B P Ravi were present.