Not many people would believe that a concrete jungle like Delhi has wildlife.

ADVERTISEMENTBut builder-turned-photographer Pradeep Deswal insists that if you have a keen eye and a searing interest in nature, you can easily spot wildlife in Delhi too. And it is this passion for environment which made Pradeep come up with an exhibition of nature photography titled Vanista, at the IHC recently. With no professional expertise or training to back him up, and only with the aid of his D90 Nikon, Pradeep has produced some stunning photographic gems which are definitely worth a watch.

Interestingly Pradeep pursues photography only as a hobby. In between work, he manages excursions to wildlife parks to catch up on his passion to click. Is there any specific reason behind his love for nature? “I have lived in Gurgaon most of my life. These days, we don’t find many birds and animals in Gurgaon but there was a time once when it was teeming with peacocks. I was always interested in bird watching and I guess that is how nature photography happened.”

He adds that there is a strange solace in nature’s lap which attracts him. “I find peace in the midst of mountains, trees, birds and animals. It takes one away from a lot of hurt and greed which the world sometimes offers. This exhibition is my way of honouring the gift of quiet which nature has given me.”

The ongoing exhibition has 40 photographs of landscapes and wildlife, shot in various nature reserves in India. Some of them depicted birds like peacocks, mynahs, flamingoes and weavers in their unique nests at the Sariska National Park, while others are scenic shots at the Ranthambore Tiger Reserve. These were besides shots of red rusty hills, rivers and lagoons of Ladakh. The vibrancy of colour coupled with clarity and attention to details make the photographs a treat to watch.

In fact, Pradeep is now planning to visit all reserves of India and capture the wildlife there. Thereafter, he will present them in an exhibition. “I recently heard that 10 per cent of South Africa’s GDP comes from the revenue earned in wildlife tourism. Here, we have twice the amount of forest cover  and are not able to put it to good use. Through my photography, I can help generate interest in India’s natural heritage, and thereby make my contribution in the country’s growth. That is my ultimate aim.”

Besides wildlife, Pradeep is also planning to photograph what he calls ‘rural beauties’.

“Once while touring a village I realised that women in our countryside are so simple and yet beautiful. However, due to little media attention, they never come into the limelight. Very soon I plan to have enough photographs to put together in an exhibition. I hope they will be loved as much as my wildlife photography.”