“If you ever sight a leopard on a tree licking its paws and letting out a big yawn after his afternoon siesta,” says cat tracker, conservationist and wildlife photographer Shaaz Jung, “be sure that he is going to descend within the next 90 seconds.” Years of being in the wild and studying game movement from close quarters have given him significant insights about animal behaviour. He is quick to add that every jungle holds a million secrets waiting to be unravelled.

ADVERTISEMENTBorn into a family of wildlife addicts, Jung spent his early years in the wild before heading to Bengaluru for schooling. After graduating in Economics in Netherlands, he discarded a lucrative corporate career and surrendered to the call from the jungle. “Not for a single moment have I regretted that decision,” says Jung, who manages the Bison Wildlife Resort, nestled between Bandipur and Nagarhole National Parks. A much-admired wildlife destination, the Bison enjoys an almost 5-star rating by TripAdvisor.

Once inside the jungle, every animal, bird and insect claims Jung’s undivided attention; but not for nothing is he often called the ‘Leopard man of India’. His evocative pictures of the spotted beast as well as other inhabitants of the forests have been published by Sanctuary Asia and National Geographic magazines.

Jung is also very active on Facebook. His dramatic photographs accompanied by interesting (and often, poetic) text strikes a chord with his many admirers. On January 31, 2015 when he posted the image of a tigress and touchingly recalled how he had once photographed her father (since deceased) in the very same spot, he received a whopping 18,000+ likes.

Jung has incredible stories to narrate about his encounters in the wild. In the course of an informal conversation, he also speaks of the many challenges that confront the future of wildlife in the country.

On his introduction to wildlife

I quite literally grew up in the jungle during the first years of my life. Coincidentally,  on the same day I was born, an elephant gave birth to a baby, with which I played as a child.

My father, Saad Bin Jung, was a visionary; when his career in first class cricket ended prematurely (due to health reasons), he changed track and began setting up wildlife resorts. He faced overwhelming odds from both the authorities and local villagers but never gave up finding the fine balance between conservation and eco-tourism.

Today, he manages a couple of resorts in Africa, while I take care of The Bison on the banks of Kabini. I spend eight months here in India and two months in Africa every year. I’ve had many close encounters with wild animals in both the countries. Some of them were scary and even life-threatening. But rather than unsettling, the encounters have only inspired me to understand the ways of the jungle better. Now I’m ever ready for surprises, and I love to expect the unexpected!

On his interest in leopards

My interest in the spotted animals was triggered because they are forgotten creatures. Everyone speaks of tigers and elephants, but not many about leopards. So, I decided to look at these beautiful and magnificent cats with their peculiar habits and behavioural patterns.

I’ve been tracking leopards for several years now, and learning new things from every single encounter. At one point, I even nursed a newborn baby when its mother abandoned it in a sugarcane field. Among the many leopards I’ve tracked, one of my buddies — whom I call Scarface — is so used to me now that he wanders at hand-shaking distance! There are also many myths about leopards that I’ve discovered. Academic journals, for instance, often claim that leopards do not scavenge on dead animals, but I know for a fact that they are opportunists when it comes to food. In the summer of 2012, I saw six cats (including two leopards) scavenging off an elephant they didn’t kill!

On wildlife photography 

The most challenging aspect of wildlife photography is tracking the wild animal and being alert to subtle signs, sounds and calls of monkeys, squirrels and birds that indicate the presence of a predator in the vicinity. There is also an element of luck, no matter how much you plan. Quality of equipment and technique of photography come last. So, in my opinion, wildlife photography is 80 per cent research — tracking and visualising the image you want to create; 15 per cent luck; and 5 per cent technique/equipment.

Some tips for budding wildlife enthusiasts

First and foremost: Know your subject! You can’t just go inside the jungle with a fancy camera and expect the animal to pose for you. You need to first understand the animal, its character, movements and habitat, and wait patiently for the opportunity to sight it.

Second tip: Have fun! Forget shooting pictures! Just allow the experience to embrace you. I’ve set for myself some strict no-camera days when I carry just the binoculars and enjoy whatever comes my way. True, in the past I’ve missed some extraordinary moments, cursed myself and even lost sleep. Not anymore. If the best action happens when I am not carrying my camera, so be it. That is the law of nature and part of the game. No point missing the experience for the sake of a photograph!

On his dream projects

Actually, I have three dreams: to shoot the polar bear in the Arctic, the hummingbird in South America, and the snow leopard in the Himalayas.

On wildlife conservation 

It is sad that we still follow obsolete laws of wildlife protection, which essentially means: chase the poacher and kill him. Conservation is a different ball game altogether, addressing larger issues like educating and empowering the local community; balancing ecological concerns with community’s needs; and in the end, about ensuring that the poacher’s son doesn’t become another poacher, but a protector of forests!

Another big problem in our country is that wildlife habitats are shrinking due to half-baked policies flaunted in the name of development. What can the animals do and where will they go? Haven’t we seen elephants entering Mysore city or leopards wandering on NICE road? These are really worrying questions. The only ray of hope comes from the increasing awareness building up among common people and civil society groups.

On how he sees his future

After so many years in the forests, I’ve learnt more from wild animals than I have from humans. I will continue to share my experiences with others, publish my photographs in magazines, consider selective exhibits and write books. I also see myself navigating from still photography to the moving image by making short films and documentaries. 

Having said this, in future photography will only be a part of my larger interests. I will immerse myself more in matters of conservation and strengthen our association with the local community in the periphery of the jungle. My family is already helping over a 100 tribal families and a 1,000 villagers in the area by providing provisions, vocational training and finding jobs for livelihood. I will continue that and also play a proactive role in addressing issues of man-animal conflicts.

One last question — can the leopard change its spots? 
Come with me to the jungle. We will check that out together.