People are losing hope in Chief Minister Siddaramaiah and it is high time he wakes up to the reality, said Janasangrama Parishat president Raghavendra Kushtagi here on Sunday.

ADVERTISEMENTAddressing the gathering after inaugurating birth anniversary celebrations of tribal leader Birsa Munda and seminars, organised jointly by Karnataka Tribal Welfare Forum and Janasangrama Parishat at Maharaja’s College Centenary Hall, Kushtagi alleged that the government had filed many cases against innocent tribals. “If Siddaramaiah has concern for tribal community, he must withdraw such false cases immediately,” he added.

Commenting on the padayatre, conducted by the Siddaramaiah as an opposition leader against mining scam in Ballari in the past, Kushtagi said “The padayatre was akin to a dance event.”

The CM had assured to form a special court to try illegal mining cases. Strangely, the chief minister has promoted the officials involved in the scam, he alleged. Many ministers, who were involved in land grabbing and mining cases now rub shoulders with the chief minister. However, it is the tribals who are facing the wrath with frequent evictions and successive governments have failed to show any mercy on them, he said.

Blaming the State and Central governments, Kushtagi said both the governments should have celebrated Birsa Munda jayanti as he fought against the British during freedom struggle. But, the governments have no concern to celebrate it, he lamented.

At Chamarajanagar
Parliamentary Secretary to Rural Development and Panchayat Raj Minister, C Puttarangashetty called upon the tribals to take up an united struggle seeking internal reservation along with forest rights.

Speaking on the birth anniversary celebrations of Birsa Munda in Chamarajnagar on Sunday, he said the government had planned various schemes for the welfare of the tribals and had also allotted sufficient funds. The tribals should utilise the government schemes and funds, he said.

State Wildlife Board member C Madegowda submitted a memorandum to Puttarangashetty seeking solution to various problems faced by the tribals. Earlier ZP vice president Ketamma flagged off the procession from Chamarajeshwaraswamy temple.