The case related to ACF and his family encroaching the land in Devamacchi reserve forest coming under buffer zone of the Nagarahole Tiger Protected area, has reached the Lokayukta court. 

ADVERTISEMENTSocial worker M V Prabhu had alleged that Nagarahole sub division wildlife ACF K D Belliappa and his family have encroached land on survey number 76/1 in Maldare at Devamacchi Reserve Forest and is engaged in coffee cultivation. The encroached land should be cleared and action should be initiated against culprit. 

CCF report

Kodagu Circle CCF (in charge) B B Mallesh in his report had said “the said 18.20 acre land is situated amidst Devamacchi forest known for its bio-diversity. The land has been encroached and is being used for coffee cultivation. The CCF had visited the spot on October 10.” 

The encroached land comes within the jurisdiction of buffer zone of Nagarahole tiger reserve and ecologically sensitive area. At the same time, the land comes under elephant corridor which passes through Mavukal-Devamacchi-Maldare-Dubare-Aanekadu-Athoor-Yadavanadu,” said the CCF report. 

The report quoting government circular dated October 10, 1996,
states that if the land was encroached in the middle of forest land or sanctuary or national park, then such land can not be regularised. 

As per Coorg Land and Revenue Regulation 1899 Act, no government employee can possess forest land. CCF Mallesh has directed Virajpet DCF to clear the encroachemnt as per Karnataka Forest Act 1963-64 (A) before October 31. 

M V Prabhu, the complainant told Deccan Herald that even after the deadline given by the CCF, the encroached land has not been cleared. “I have submitted complaint along with the documents to senior forest department official and chief secretary. 

The department inquiry has confirmed encroachment. Inspite of it, no action was initiated against the culprit,” said Prabhu. 

Alleging negligence of the officials, a protest will be staged in front of Aranya Bhavana in Bengaluru on November 29. Freedom fighter Doreswamy, environment expert Yallappa Reddy and Government land encroachment committee President A T Ramaswamy will be invited to take part in the protest.” 

All effort to reach out ACF K D Belliappa went futile.

‘Maintain status quo’

Meanwhile, Virajpet DFO Shankar said that local court in Virajpet has directed to maintain status quo in the case pertaining to encroachment of Devamacchi reserve forest. 

When asked why no action was taken inspite of the CCF report, DFO said “K Tangamma (mother of K D Belliappa) had approached the court. The court has directed to maintain status quo till November 24. The family was cultivating before 1978. Based on it, the previous DC had sanctioned three acre each to five members in the family. ACF Belliappa has promised to give back land that was sanctioned to him,” said the DFO. 

 Deputy Commissioner Anurag Tewari said: “I will hold talks with the senior officials from forest department. If the land encroachment is proved, then legal action will be initiated.”