My wife Meera and I undertook a two-month-long self-drive tour in the USA last year, roping in two other couples who are our family friends. 

ADVERTISEMENTAll three men are classmates from IIT-Madras. While the tour covered the East coast to midwest stretch of USA, the visit to Alaska, USA’s northwest frontier, was taken up only by me and my wife. 

Our original plan of a packaged Alaska cruise took a pleasant turn when I phoned another one of my IIT classmates, Gopal Ramachandran, now settled in California.

He suggested that he could fly us in his four-seater Mooney single propeller aircraft all over Alaska. The prospect of experiencing a cruise package in Alaska and much more, by flying at low heights all over the majestic mountains, glaciers, volcanoes, and terrestrial wildlife was attractive enough for us to make up our minds immediately. 

The result – our initial idea of a one-week cruise became a 12-day sky borne, water borne and land borne tour of Alaska.

The three of us boarded the aircraft at Reid-Hill view airport in San Jose at 10 am on a sunny August day. We reached Petersburg Island on the Alaskan coast at 9 pm after two refuelling stops, one in California and the other in Washington state.

The aerial views of the Cascade mountain range spanning the states of California, Oregon and Washington were breathtaking. We flew past Mt Shasta, 3 Sisters, Mt St Helens and Mt Rainier, almost grazing over their tops. 

The highlight was Mt St Helens, which is 9,500 feet high and has a crater formed after a cataclysmic volcano erupted in 1980, ripping a 1000 feet high chunk off the summit, the eruption column rising 80,000 ft into the atmosphere. 

Our stay in Petersburg was in a flat attached to the fish processing plant, courtesy the Factory Manager, Patrick Wilson,  an acquaintance of my pilot-classmate. The tour through the plant was an exciting piece of education about the commercial fishing and fish-processing industry in Alaska. The manager’s wife, Kim Wilson, who manages the factory canteen, became our friend. 

A leisurely walk on the quaint streets in Petersburg, and a drive round the entire island in the evening made up our next day.  The following day, we boarded a five-hour cruise to visit the LeConte glacier. 

Other highlights of the cruise were sea lions climbing up onto the buoys anchored in the fjords, otters floating in the waters, harbour seals lazing on the ice floats and innumerable icebergs as we neared the glacier. The ferry captain was sporting enough to steer the boat at a crawling speed so that we could stretch out our hands through the windows and touch the icebergs.

We flew to Seward where we undertook a 9 am to 6 pm cruise in the Kenai fjord. In addition to a fascinating repeat of the sights we saw in the LeConte Bay cruise, we had the bonus of watching a pair of humpback whales in the wild, alternately perform acrobatics.

Our flight to Anchorage glided us over Denali National Forest, grazing past Mt McKinley, which at 20,320 feet and is the tallest peak in North America. This mount is much taller than Mt Everest. Traversing through the state, I couldn’t help but sense that Alaska is undoubtedly a dream destination for travellers seeking an off-the-beaten-track experience.