It now seems to be the turn of political upheavals and policy matters in blocking any work from taking off at this famous tourist destination, which is also called the ‘Niagara of India.’

When the Karnataka Tourism Department came up with a Rs 100-crore proposal to develop Hogenakkal falls nearly two years ago, it was perceived that the jinx attached to the tourist place for several years was at last coming to an end. But the proposal has so far not moved an inch, thanks to the frequent political upheavals in the State.

Hogenakkal falls is a bone of contention between Karnataka and Tamil Nadu over the inter-state boundary. A 400-acre island, including the falls, has been a disputed area for nearly a century now with both States claiming its ownership. However, Tamil Nadu implemented certain tourist infrastructure projects in the island when Veerappan was virtually ruling the forest areas on the Karnataka side leading to the falls. People from Karnataka have to pass through M M Hills and Gopinatham forest areas, which were part of the brigand's territory, to reach the falls. 

After Veerappan was killed in 2004, the Karnataka Tourism Department decided to tap the tourism potential of the falls and hence, drew up a mega project (to be implemented on its side of the River Cauvery and not at the disputed island). Under the plan, the Tourism Department would seek Rs 100 crore from the Centre from its Destination Development Scheme. All necessary facilities for tourists like lodges, toilets, guest houses, landscaping and watch towers would be developed under the project on a 10-acre land near the falls. It also plans to develop a garden on the lines of the famous Brindavan Gardens in Mandya district on a 27-acre land located close to the falls.

Official sources said that though the then tourism minister and mining baron Janardhana Reddy had initially shown a green signal to the project, he hardly took interest to pursue it. 
Reddy, who is presently lodged in an Andhra Pradesh jail on charges of illegal mining, was busy fighting his political battle and as a result, the project was put on the back burner. 

Though H Halappa was in-charge minister of Chamarajnagar district, where Hogenakkal is located, he did not risk interfering in Reddy's portfolio. Halappa was later forced to resign as minister on charges of rape.

Ever since Reddy lost his ministerial position following the Lokayukta report on illegal mining and the government headed by D V Sadananda Gowda took over in August this year, the Tourism ministry has not got a minister of its own. 

Gowda has kept the portfolio with him. And in the absence of a dedicated minister for the department, it has become extremely difficult to push through major decisions related to the project, officials pointed out.

For instance, the 10-acre land near Hogenakkal comes under the Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary. So, the State Forest Department has to get the Centre's clearance to implement the project proposed by the State Tourism Department there. For intra-department cooperation like this, a dedicated minister is a must, officials explained.

Officials said the Chamarajnagar district in-charge minister and Minister for Excise M P Renukacharya hardly finds  time to review development projects in the district. Being a staunch supporter of former chief minister B S Yeddyurappa, he is said to be bothered only about pleasing his leader most of the time.

ADVERTISEMENT