Storytelling has always fascinated people – the anticipation and the curiosity that build up while the story unfolds are the fun parts. While storytelling has been ingrained in our culture and history, it has taken a new turn of late to cater to the modern-day audience.

ADVERTISEMENTTo ensure that storytelling remains alive and interesting, the Bangalore Storytelling Society (BSS), a group of storytellers, have come together to nurture this art. While storytelling is mostly conceived for children, BSS tries to break the stereotype, thus benefitting adults too. 
BSS was formed in 2013 and is dedicated to reviving, promoting and popularising storytelling as a performance medium. The members carry out activities related to storytelling such as meet-ups, ‘Tell-a-thon’, festivals and workshops.

They also network and collaborate with international storytelling groups to bring about cultural exchange through storytelling. The nine founder members collaboratively run various activities around the City in order to spread their love of stories. 

The core team members of BSS are Ameen Haque, Champa Saha, Falak Randerian, Rashmi Kulkarni, Vikram Sridhar, Sowmya Srinivasan, Neeta Lalwani, Deeptha Vivekanand and Aparna Athreya. 

BSS is open to anyone with an interest in storytelling and is now a 1,000-member community on Facebook. They run monthly storytelling meet-ups for adults to tell stories to adults. They also run weekend storytelling sessions for children at Rangasthala Auditorium, Metro Art Centre. Another flagship event of theirs is ‘Tell-a-thon’, which has several professional storytellers performing to a ticketed audience based on a unique theme.

Deeptha, one of the members, strive to promote the influence of stories in education. Her experience as a training consultant led her to embrace storytelling as a teaching-learning tool 
for adults and children alike. “I love narrating folk-tales that involve the audience and have performed at several schools, activity centres and book stores in Bengaluru and Chennai,” she says. Sowmya performs stories for children and adults with equal delight. Her experiences with theatre in school and college have helped her visualise stories for different occasions. All the members have different jobs but come together with a common mission to share stories.   Aparna, who owns an independent organisation, feels that balancing time between her organisation, family and BSS comes with conscious effort. “It’s a very conscious 
call that I take. There is a limited time that I keep for my organisation, family and passion. 
When it comes to passion, it’s always BSS — that is where my creative juices are churned out and I can do things for the love of stories.” 

Neeta believes that life is a story and one evolves as they go through this journey.  “One of the biggest challenge we faced was to break stereotypes that were attached to storytelling. People always thought that storytelling was for children and is an entertainment tool but we tried to break that stereotype and tell people that storytelling can be used for learning purposes and is also a powerful tool for adults. The members of BSS are all professional 
storytellers but when we meet, we let go of our egos as we come under a common umbrella to spread the love of stories.” Aparna also talks about their future plans. “We want to take storytelling to every segment of the society irrespective of the geography, cultural background and ethnicity. We also need to have a storytelling museum where we can treasure the epic journey of storytelling.” 

Vikram believes in storytelling as a strong medium for conservation. A marketing professional, he combines his work and interest in theatre, wildlife and the social sector in his storytelling.He tries to connect the modern-day listeners to  the environment around through the power of stories. To become a member of BSS, one can attend their regular meet-ups and audition. 
For details, log on to www.bangalorestorytellingsociety.com