It is important to carefully select optional subjects and the board of study after Class 10. Ali Khwaja provides some tips that would help students choose the right career path

ADVERTISEMENTAnkit’s father had a relevant point when he asked me, “Do you think my 15-year-old son can take a balanced and well-thought decision regarding his career?” Ankit, like many of his classmates, had put in hard work consistently, particularly in the last one year when he tackled the board exams. He had no time for leisure, sports, TV or friends and obviously, no time to ponder over what he would do after he completes class 10.

With exams behind him now, the time has come to start applying for admission, to decide whether to continue in CBSE/ISC or switch over to another board, and to take the crucial decision of what optional subjects to select for the next two years.

A small minority of students who have clear ambitions generally do not find it difficult to select the subjects that will lead them to their goals. But many others are thoroughly confused, unsure and even apprehensive when taking this critical decision.

Some, like Ankit and his father, want to take the easy way out by selecting science, specifically PCMB (Physics, Chemistry, Maths, Biology), “to keep all options open”.

While some may like this option, many others are only postponing an important decision and may regret it later. Hence, even if you have not been able to decide on your final career goals by the time you finish Class 10, it is important that you select your optional subjects and the board of study carefully.

Selecting wisely

For those confused with the innumerable options in the nation today, here are some helpful parameters. If you are good with science subjects and score above average, you can consider taking up science for +2. Do not take it if you have to struggle and push yourself, or have been dependent on tutors to score marks.

If you are fairly clear that you are not interested in careers related to life sciences, namely medicine, pharmacy, paramedical, agriculture, scientific research, environment, wildlife, then it is advisable not to take up biology, so that you can focus on the other three subjects. In such a case, you can either take up computer science, physical education or some such lighter subject.

For those who are interested in life sciences but are poor in mathematics, there are a few selected colleges and schools that offer combination of physics, chemistry, biology along with a subject like home science, psychology, physical education etc. If mathematics has been very difficult in Class 10 for you, do not take it up any further.

In both cases, do browse through the text books of Class 11, and be aware that the portions increase significantly beyond Class 10. So, if you feel that it might turn into a burden, you can consider optionals other than science.

On the other hand, if you have taken up science and can enjoy studying it for two more years, it does give you a stronger foundation and a wider perspective, even if you choose a non-science career eventually. But if you have taken up science for strengthening your base and not for pursuing engineering, do not succumb to the pressure of getting into rigorous coaching classes for IIT, CET etc, which can drain your energy.

If you have decided not to take science, do not presume that commerce is your only other option. humanities offer excellent career opportunities now, unlike earlier. Take up commerce only if you are oriented towards commercial activities. Do browse through the Class 11 textbooks of accounts and business studies, since these are the two compulsory optional subjects in the field.

Other than those two, you need to select two more from maths, business maths, statistics, economics, history, computers etc., depending on which school or college you are applying to. If you are aiming for chartered accountancy or even wish to get into computer applications (MCA) later, it is advisable to take maths.

Apart from this, arts can also lead you to innumerable challenging careers ranging from administration, management, design, law, psychology, human resource management, media, journalism, teaching etc. Do not think that Arts is in any way inferior to other streams.

If you have a passion for the above mentioned fields (or many others which can be pursued through humanities, languages, social sciences), then do consider taking it up at the +2 level, enjoying your studies for two years, and excelling in whatever you are doing — rather than taking up science only to find yourself being mediocre and struggling.

The board of choice

Those completing Class 10 through state board i.e., SSLC, should preferably continue with PUC since the transition will be smoother. Those passing out from CBSE, ICSE or IGCSE can consider the following options:

* If you are planning on taking up any of the national level entrance exams like JEE, AIPMT, CLAT, NDA, civil services, etc., then it may be advisable to take up CBSE at the +2 level because the syllabus comes closest to those entrance tests.
* If you are an out-of-box thinker, wanting to get into communication, creativity, liberal arts or environment, then ISC offers your greater opportunities and flexibility too.

* If your aim is to get into fields like engineering, medicine and agriculture through the state level entrance exams like CET, then the PUC syllabus prepares you best to crack those tests. Students switching boards after Class 10 should check portions that others have studied, but have not been included in their curriculum.

* IGCSE, which is currently growing in popularity, is the most flexible syllabus, and is also useful for those who wish to pursue their undergraduate studies abroad.

* Many students are not aware of another board, National Institute of Open Studies (NIOS), which offers complete flexibility with a very wide range of subjects across all the streams of Science, Commerce and Arts. You can even give the exam in installments every six months, and need not study any language other than english. Details are available at www.nios.ac.in.

Students who find academics difficult and have already been under pressure to clear Class 10 can take up the three-year government diploma available in most branches of engineering, and also in commerce. After the diploma, the student has the option of getting into second year of BE or Bcom through lateral entry programme, or take up a job and consider higher studies later.

Do not get influenced by people who live in the past. There will be many old-timers who are completely out of touch with reality and can influence minds based on their old experiences. Talk to people who are abreast with what is happening in the present and have the vision to look forward to the next 50 years, which is going to be your average career span.

Excellent career opportunities are opening up in newer fields and some of the traditional fields which were not very popular since they were not financially rewarding, have now become very lucrative and talented youngsters are able to earn as much or more than they would in the traditional fields like engineering and medicine. Hence, a well thought-out decision at this juncture can ensure that you can look forward to a very rewarding and satisfying future.

(The author is founder and chairman, Banjara Academy, Bengaluru)