KAZIRANGA, Dec 2 - Over and above frequent cases of poaching and illegal trade in wildlife body parts, serious violation of the Biomedical Waste Management Act in Golaghat district, where some irresponsible healthcare facilities have been disposing off biomedical waste from clinics and hospitals at Nambor Doigrung Wildlife Sanctuary adjacent to National Highway 39, has posed a serious threat to wild animals as well as humans alike in recent days. Informing this Correspondent, the Golaghat DFO Jayshree Naiding said that there had been blatant violation of the Biomedical Waste Management Act, thus causing great risk to wild animals, especially elephant calves since the said area is an important wild elephant corridor as well as other wildlife. Some waste material was found to be scattered upto 70 metres from the dumping site. Naiding said that she had personally visited the site along with her team of forest officials and found the situation to be alarming. She informed that the Deputy Commissioner of Golaghat district had been apprised of this alarming condition at Nambor Doigrung Wildlife Sanctuary. Naiding informed that since there had been frequent movement of wild elephants along with their calves in the said area, hence these calves were very prone to be severely injured by the discarded needles and other sharp material which are often disposed off irresponsibly by some healthcare facilities. It may be pertinent to mention here that elephant calves are known to often play with unusual material on their migratory path. Naiding added that a letter in this regard was being forwarded to the Joint Director of Health Services, Golaghat district and copies of the same was being sent to the Deputy Commissioner, PCCF( Wildlife) and Chairman of the State Pollution Control Board. This is the second such incident which has come to light at Nambor Doigrung Wildlife Sanctuary in Golaghat district. Earlier too, a similar episode was witnessed in July. The socially conscious section of people here have opined that it is very important that the Government initiates firm steps in ensuring strict implementation of rules and regulations of the Biomedical Waste Management Act by the healthcare facilities while disposing off their medical waste. If no action is taken by the authorities concerned, then this dangerous practise will be repeated by the errant healthcare facilities, which may cause serious harm to animals and humans alike, not to mention elephants of Nambor Doigrung Wildlife Sanctuary.